THE TUNNEL
by WILLIAM H. GASS
                       Anaxagoras said to a man who was grieving because he lay dying in a foreign land, "The descent to hell is the same from every -place."
                                            What I have to tell you is as long as life, but I shall run as swiftly, so before you know it, we shall both be over.
     LIFE IN A CHAIR It was my intention, when I began, to write an introduction to my work on the Germans. Though its
                              thick folders lie beside me now, I know I cannot. Endings, instead, possess me . . . all ways out.
       Embarrassed, I’m compelled to smile. 1 was going to extend my sympathy to my opponents. Here, in my introduction, raised above me like an arch of triumph, 1 meant to place a wreath upon myself. But each time I turned my pen to the task, it turned aside to strike me.
       As I look at the pages of my manuscript, or stare at the books which wall my study, I realize I must again attempt to put this prison of my life in language.
       It should have been a simple ceremony: a wreath to honor death and my success—the defense of my hypothesis concerning Germany.
       And when I wrote my book, to whom was I writing if not the world? . . . the world! . . . the world . . . the world is William welshing on a bet; it is Olive sewing up the gut of a goose; it is Reynolds raping Rosie on the frat-house stair; it is a low blow, a dreary afternoon, an exclamation of disgust. And when I wrote was 1 writing to win renown, as it’s customarily claimed? or to gain revenge after a long bide of time and tight rein of temper? to earn promotion, to rise above the rest like a loosed balloon? or was it from weak self-esteem? from pure funk, out of a distant childhood fear or recent shame? . . . the world . . . the world, alas. It is Alice committing her Tampax to the trash.
       I began, I remember, because I felt I had to. I’d reached that modest height in my career, that gentle rise, from which I could coast out of gear to a soft stop.
         Now I wonder why not. Why not? But then duty drove me forward like a soldier. I said it was time for “the Big Book,” the long monument to my mind 1 repeatedly dreamed I had to have: a pyramid, a column tall enough to satisfy the sky. Duty drove me the way it drives men into marriage. Begetting is expected of us, and in those days of heavy men in helmets the seed was certain, and wanted only the wind for a womb, or any slit; yet what sprang up out of those foxholes we fucked with our fists but our own frightened selves? with a shout of pure terror, too. That too—that too was expected; it was expected even of flabby maleless men like me. And now, here, where I am writing still, still in this chair, hammering type like tacks into the page, speaking without a listening ear, whose eye do I hope to catch and charm and fill with tears and understanding, if not my own, my own ordinary, unforgiving and unfeeling eye?
         . . . my eye. So sentences circle me like a toy train. What could I have said about the Boche, about bigotry, barbarism, butchery, Bach, that hasn’t been said as repeatedly as I dreamed my dream of glory, unless it was what I’ve said? What could 1 have explained where no reason exists and no cause is adequate; what body burned to a crisp could I have rebelieved was bacon, if 1 had not taken the tack 1 took?
           And last night, with my lids pulled over me, I went on seeing as if 1 were an open window. Full of wind. 1 wasn’t lying in peaceful darkness, that darkness I desired, that peace I needed. My whole head was lit with noises, yet no Sunday park could have been more lonely: thoughts tossed away, left like litter to be blown about and lost. There were long avenues of footfall, leaf flutter lacking leaf or tree, barks unreturned to their dogs.
           My hypothesis . . . My word . . . My world . . . My Germany . . .
       Of course there is nothing genuinely German about me, though my name suggests that some distant ancestor doubtless came from that direction, for I have at least three generations of Americans safely beneath me. My wife, a richly scutcheoned Muhlenberg and far more devoted to armorial lines and ties of blood—all such blazonry—than I could ever bring myself to be, has already tunneled through five layers of her own to find, to her unrelenting triumph and delight, the deepest layer lying on American soil still, and under the line of the nineteenth century, if only by a spade's length. So my name, and the fact that I speak the German language fluently, having spent a good many years in that exemplary country (though there is nothing genuinely German about me), help make the German nation a natural inference. I was there first as a student in the middle of the thirties, and 1 must confess 1 was caught up in the partisan frenzy of those stirred and stirring times; yet when I returned it was ironically as a soldier behind the guns of the First Army, and almost immediately afterward 1 began my term as a consultant on “dirty Fascist things" at the Nurem-
       berg Trials. Finally, on the fore-edge of the fifties, with my fourteen hundred francs of fame, to alter the French reviewer’s expression in my favor, I purchased my release from the paws of the military and was permitted to become a tourist and teacher and scholar again. Yes, by that time 1 had a certain dismal renown as the author of the Kohler thesis concerning Nazi crimes and German guilt, and this preceded me and lit my path, so that I had to suffer a certain sort of welcome too, a welcome which made me profoundly uneasy, for I was met and greeted as an equal; as, that is, a German, a German all along, and hence a refugee: I was William Frederick Kohler, wasn’t I? wasn't I fat and fair, with a dazzling blond wife and a troop of stalwart children fond of—heaven help them—hiking about with bare knees? and so why not? . . . no, there was no mistake, I had the name and knew the language, looked the part, had been wisely away through the war, and, of course (though no one said it, it was this which pinned that wretched label to my coat like a star), had written that remarkably sane, peace-seeking book, so close on the event, too; a book which was severe— all right, it was severe, perhaps severe—yet patient, fair and calm, a Christian book really, its commentators, my hostesses, their guests, all my new friends, smiling pleasantly to pump my hand, declared (as though history had a fever); yes, so calm and peace-seeking (came Herr Kohler’s cool and soothing palm), so patient and perceptive, so serene (while he lay bitterly becalmed himself)— with a quotation from Heinrich Heine just beneath the title like a tombstone with a grave—that the French reviewer (and there was only one at first) spat on his page (he had a nose like a dirk and spectacles enlarged his eyes): It will be fourteen hundred francs spent on infamy, he said, and you will get your money’s worth. Of peace-seeking, peace-making, peace-loving Buch. A good buy.
        A friend of mine did the French version, but it was I, quite unaccompliced, who betrayed my English to the German. At twelve marks it continues to have a brisk sale. I redid my study with a recent check.
        1 had intended to introduce
        This is to introduce a work on death by one who’s spent his life in a chair.
        I could not hold my father in much love, my mother either. Indeed, I learned to love far later, as it proved, than they had time for. So perished they without it. None of us grieves. I’ve played a few sly tricks upon insanity since then, and now life holds me as it once held them—in a dry fist. Hearts held that way wad up eventually . . . trees did. Once—once only—my heart burst bloodily in that grip. But what has this to do with me now, or with Germany?
          Life in a chair
          Yes, I’ve sat too long, no wonder it’s painful, though this is the great Tabor’s own chair, which I had shipped from Germany. It swivels smoothly, tips without a sound. In the mornings he lectured at the university. Scholars, statesmen, writers, filled his afternoons. My day commences, he said to me once, his fingers grazing on a slope of papers, when 1 come to rest in here at the end of an evening and begin making Greek and Roman history up out of German words, French wit, and English observation. He scrawled his famous smile across his face, hastily, like an autograph; but he was old, already ill, and his hand trembled. German words, he said, not German feeling. Tabor spoke ironically, of course, yet what he said was true: he woke because his neighbors slumbered; he spied upon their dreams; he even entered their dreams eventually, and brandished a knife in the nightmares of Europe. Magus Tabor. Mad Meg, they called him. One day they’d say he wore the decade like a diadem. His baldness glistened like a forest pool. There’ve been times when this chair’s been my only haven, he said, and his lids closed over his protruding eyes. Night had fallen behind them—in Mad Meg’s head. You see how obedient it is; how swiftly it turns, like fortune in history? He spun the chair hard, his eyes still in lids. So I find it easy to reverse my position. He laughed with the stutter of an angry bird and I managed a low social chuckle. It really was a dream for him, all this: our conversation, the lecture of the morning, the interrupting applause and tumult of shouts at the end, the famous and powerful who waited for him while he spoke with an unimportant, young, and dazzled American. Those deeply curtained eyes reminded me that we were drifting through the middle of his sleep, and that I was just a wraith who would evaporate the instant he sank into his circuiting chair—sank into the past—into death—into history.
          The study of history, gentlemen
                                 the study of history
          The hall was full. There were hundreds—crowds in the doorways, everyone still. The heads of the great grew like blossoms from the pillars lining the walls: in a rise along one side—Lessing, Herder, Hegel, Fichte, Schelling; in a fall along the other—Mftser, Dilthey, Ranke, Troeltsch, Treitschke. My first time in that room I had sat by the bust of Treitschke and read the inscription plaqued beneath it on the column:
                ONLY A STOUT HEART WHICH FEELS THE JOYS AND SORROWS OF THE FATHERLAND AS ITS OWN CAN GIVE VERACITY TO AN HISTORICAL NARRATIVE.
    It was longer than I care to admit before I realized that for Mad Meg, too, truth was the historian’s gift to history.
                                              no
    That’s not nearly strong enough. And my—my what?—my naivete? my admiration? my vanity?—something—prevented me from understanding what he wrote—he preached—so many times so plainly.
      The window of the car would not roll up and Lou's face looked warm from the cold wind as if freshly slapped or shamed or elsewhere loved. My hand fell to hers, too, somewhat like a discarded glove, and she took it with a squeeze, so that the chilled soon lay within the chilled, I thought, like a bottle of champagne. Cold hand, moist part, I said. Hers slipped away.
            Drafts lapped my neck. I cobble history, Tabor shouted when he saw me again, placing his huge, rough-knuckled fists against my chest. We met at a large impersonal affair, a reception held at a chancellery, and I had finally burrowed to the stair to scan the crowd, perhaps to find a friend or two, when I observed him in the middle of the room, over his head in hair and shoulders, burning quietly, the only thing alive among the potted ferns and suits of armor. The icy marble floor was flopped with Oriental rugs and steadily enlarging spills of people. He was alone, ill. 1 was astonished to see him in such a place. I cobble history the way a cobbler cobbles shoes, he said. Wretched fellow, I thought: in the midst of this crush, you’re composing a lecture. If it were not for me the Roman Empire— here he made a hard white ball of his hands—would not, an instant—I heard his harsh laugh bubble from the crowd—stay together—and his hands flew apart with startling violence, fingers fanned. There was a terrible energy in that gesture, although he was, by this time, a sick old man, so weak he tottered. His ears seemed unnaturally fastened to his head, and his arms emerged from the holes of his sleeves as if the flesh had remained as a lining. I swaddled my neck in my arms and would have turned my collar if I’d dared. Light spewed from the chandeliers. Countless pairs of glistening boots reechoed from the marble squares. Then an angry woman in a powdered bosom passed between us, and I was glad to be carried away. Poor Tabor. His lips were still moving when he disappeared behind a heavily forested Prussian chest. Wise eyes slid sneakily down the stairs. Voices were impeccably coiffed. A moist mouth relieved a sausage of its stick. Long gowns whispered like breezes together, and I saw several backs begging to be amorously bitten. Bellies were in belly bras. Consequently postures were perfect. Since coming to Germany and manhood at the commencement of the thirties, I had known few such opulent days. There were so many bits of brilliant metal, so much jewelry, so many cummerbunds and ribbons, a gently undulating sea of silk-tossed light, that the gilded ceiling drew away like heat and seemed a
            sky. Thus I beheld him for the first time (or anyway eyed him out); and 1 felt the smile I’d penciled in above my chin fade like the line beneath the last rub of an eraser. Never mind. There was no need then for fidelity, only for entertainment. Elaborate and lie. Describe the scene to your quam diu friends. Link, Hintze, and Krauske—friends who faded, whom heat cannot bring back even in the palest outline like lemon juice on paper. Describe—and make it rich, make it fun, full of rhetoric and episode—Mad Meg in the Maelstrom.
            I faced the four corners, cupped the bowl of my glass like a breast, began the construction of my anecdote, and let the wine die.
        Mad Meg in the Maelstrom
                                in, among, amid people
             each like a wind, each wanting you to face its way, and with the wind’s ineluctable reach compelling you—invisibly—as might oh-so-many helpful steering palms at your helpless elbow: wife and lover, full of silent entreaty; parents, friends, bringing to bear what once one
                could call “the their being”; ics, colleagues, len cheeked, every point like of the wind your yielding, compass . . . here, on this
very breath of students, crit-strangers, swol-puffing from those cherubs till their urging, flood the whole except perhaps little windless
              page, where I’m beseeched by no one, heard by no one—unaffected, unaffecting—and can point my own direction if I any longer have one; live as though I have (and had) a life; let this vacant paper window frame a world.
             Is writing to yourself a healthier insanity than talking to yourself? Would Amiel say so? Gide or Pepys?
                               Night, joked Mallet too much; wrong. ’Tis below you. Tis bad habit. No more of it.
    Or is making love to yourself, elaborately, with ritual remorse, better? worse?
       Yet I should take notes. 1 ve inherited a poor memory from my mum, yes, the
    way some inherit weak eyes, and everything goes by me as remembered______as
    observed—as the poop of public birds.
                       Very mild and warm. About 6 glow-worms shining faintly.
                     We went up as far as the grove. When we came home the fire was out. We ate our supper in the dark, and went to bed immediately. William was disturbed in the night by the rain coming into his room, for it was a very rainy night. The ash leaves lay across the road.
       There’s death in every diary. I’ve found it there the way I’ve found so many words, lying silent and forgotten like old shoes stiffening in a closet, or moving at the approach of my eye like a spider in a toolbox, as though some small piece of metal were alive. Wasn't there a day in infancy when such a startle would have made my limbs splash open?
       I pick up my dropped life in this calamitous century's sixty-seventh year; a year windy with unreason, noisy with nonsense and meaningless milling; a year, like the last, just right for a decade as mired in morality as a circus in mud, as infested with fakes as a fair. Perhaps it’s only a trampled package in the street—this life I pick up—and maybe my writing is its furtive unwrapping.
       In a diary you may go to greet death in the most slovenly state of undress and disease, your language out of reach of any public reading, your own eye kind, accustomed to your own wastes and malodorous ailments, almost incapable of offense, incurably forgiving. You may write without anyone’s whining that the day was not only “mild” but "warm” as well; you can pointlessly infer that if the rain came pelting into Wm’s room, it must have been a rainy night indeed; and you can inadvertently say something beautiful containing ash leaves, and never register what you saw of the storm, or felt about love in your unbrothered bed, or say that you wept along your sleeping arm, or signify how well you grasped the sense of what you said.
             So I wonder why I’ve lived so much of my life in a chair the way I wonder at the daily disappearance of my chin—without surprise—without question or answer—because loneliness is unendurable elsewhere. Here it may be sat through, if not stood. Here it may be occasionally relieved, like a crowded bowel. Here it may be handled like a laboratory mouse, so tenderly it squeaks only from the pressures of its own inner fears. And here that loneliness may be shaped the way the first dumb lump of clay was slapped to speech in the divine grip. We were late among the living, and by the time God got to us ice was already slipping from the poles as if from an imperfectly decorated cake. The
             stars and planets were out of sync. Uncursed, the serpent was swaying on its tail like an enraptured rope. Haven’t I always maintained that our several ribs were the incriminating print of a bedeviled and embittered fist?
                            February 29. My room. A table covered entirely by a heap of magazines and books: they look like the seven dresses of La Tilda... They look like a man with a cane. They look like a careless bazaar on a market day.
                            A small night table is littered with drugs, an half apothecary shop.
                            A bureau whose drawers never close well (like a man whose slant teeth forbid his mouth to shut well) carries the two brushes I have and my phonograph records.
                            The mirror is cockeyed.
             How shall it save me? to say: went out; to say: saw squirrels chasing one another through the sycamores (the sky as dry as Wordsworth’s road was wet); to write: watched the loosened leaves kite slowly down. Another day. Another dolor. Nothing retained but a pun. Of Culp’s contrivance. What the hell. Another day. Broke out. Encountered my wife shouldering aside cloud. You’d look a lot better with a belt, she said; that roll around your middle makes your pants spread. 1 reply with a sad clown’s grin that I suffer from a surfeit of imaginary pies. In the house, read death lists. Poked about the basement. Ducked my memories of my children. Groused.
             I’ve no mirror, cockeyed or otherwise. One wrinkled window. Above: a worn lace curtain like a rusted screen. My thoughts seem pulled from my head like the poetry of Rilke. The journal of my other self, he once thought to call his book. The journal of my other book. How’s that for this? Went out. Saw: hospitals. Saw self. And if I cried, as I am crying now, would Rilke heed me, or any of his angels? I once worked hard on him, and out of love, too, the way I still work in the garden now and then, or order canceled checks. Remember to buy milk. On my desk is a lamp whose base is a brass image of young hectoring Jesus. Stolen from Germany. Swaddled in underwear. Transported by trunk.
                          What will you do, God, when I croak?
                          I am your jug (when I am broke?)
                          I am your ale (when I’ve gone flat?)
                          Your daily stint, your feathered hat...
                          You won’t mean nuthin after that.
          Jesus is showing us a text from the Good Book, but the inscription is so worn I can’t make it out. No doubt it’s the usual. Faint inscriptions are always that.
                      If you are laughter, I am joke.
                         January 28.1 shall not remember what happened on this day. It is a blank. At the end of my life I may want it, may long to have it. There was a new moon: that I remember. But who came or what I did—all is lost. It’s just a day missed, a day crossing the line.
     A twinge today when I bit into a cookie. Watch it. Watch it. What? Thoughts pulled from my head and collected the way hair wads in my wife’s comb: milk, mirror, thievery, the youthful brass Jesus, translated Rilke. I’m glad I don’t have to live through the rest of your life, Lou said.
                         I had a tooth out the other day, curious and interesting like a little lifetime—first, the long drawn drag, then the twist of the hand and the crack of doom!
       Women write them. They’ve nothing else to do but die into diaries . . . subside like unpillowed fluff.
                         Sunday, March 8th ... I intend no introspection. I mark Henry James’ sentence: observe perpetually. Observe the oncome of age. Observe greed. Observe my own despondency ... I will go down with my colours flying... Suppose I selected one dominant figure in every age and wrote round and about. Occupation is essential. And now with some pleasure I find that it’s seven; and must cook dinner. Haddock and sausage meat. I think it is true that one gains a certain hold on sausage and haddock by writing them down.
     I intend no introspection. Mark that. Occupation is essential. When I had written what I had written; when I had reached the present—the dead end of history—to find it empty as an empty pantry;
                                                                  then I had fallen
     into the finis of my book: into its calm (all right, cold) yet angry conclusion; because it ceased in a silence which had silence for its fanfare; the blank page beyond did not even say “blank,” any more than death itself says "death,” or “over,” or “finis,” or “done.”
        1 should not have liked to sup upon poor Virginia’s sup. Did she mark how her own sentences secretly sentenced her? did she observe how her watery
       grave was foretold by the very self she sheltered and lent her pen? her petticoats, perhaps, like wet flags, her pockets weighted with stones, and the March of her suicide with an 8 in it, like this entry? What did that other dame—Colette—command? Regarde! Conrad, Chekhov: see! they said. Sniff, pry, peek, peer. Look. Scrutinize. Ah, lovely, lovely, tender little . . . Look and love God and get lucky. Et tu auras la grace des grandes choses. Well, I intend no in . . . Out is all of it. Out of the print and over the cover ... to grandmother’s house we go. I study all other methods of desperate disappearance.
           My office chair is not a bit like this old, throned, well-oiled wheel of my mad tongue’s master; yet 1 had her in it. Stiff, without style, and with a mousy little squeak. Lou. Like one of the dime-store trinkets she sold. Like a piece of freshly picked and bitten history. Fuck the facts, honey. Fuck'em. And they will spend themselves like money. To leave you limp with afterlonging. Why are you so mean to me, she said, when all I want is my fair slice of your life, its sordid boons? “All 1 want,” we always begin, when we pretend we mean “just a little.” All I want: I want to lay the world waste like its moon. I do not understand why a body should be so appealing—so warm in winter, so cool through every heat, so calm beneath my lone excitement. Coy, she came after hours. Triste. Straight from the Woolworth where, improbably, she worked to pay her way into my class. Climb the stairs to my cloud-shrouded office. Drag a book bag. Straddle the arms of my varnish-yellow chair. Her loveliness awash my life, 1 went down gladly, colors flying. Chair means ‘flesh’ in French. La Verbe s'est faite chan. Thus and So the mind slips. There was not a single jingle from her, not the barest bracelet rattle, not a sigh. And when my book appears, will they award me a watch, a dazzled stare? bucks from the bank? kudos from the crowd? a laud from the Leathered Overlords? or even one moan of dispassionate pleasure? Will they distinguish me from the ruck in the chain stores—with a taller stack? In a Porky Pig’s eye. 1, in my solitary self, am the fat chance. She knew she was A LASS WITHOUT A LACK. And 1 a groan. Put my small penis in her. Only the chair was moved. And 1 came like an ad in the mail. Yet beyond the bitterness now, I can still taste the sweet gift, the tater-sweet shiver of her inner thigh. Life in a chair. I found her mouth in a moue in the Five 8c Dime where she worked. Not in scarves, confections, stationery, housewares, toddlers, paints. In jewelry. In junk. One bracelet on her wrist like one of my mother’s rings of wire. In a purse. In a pout. In a pique. The yearn was immediate, like being struck by the sun. And I fell upon her arm like Irish light.
       Up late. )
       Down long J t^1's emPcy hour the light takes on an imprisoned harshness.
     Through its window my cell glows like a single bulb. It is that speck of life you sometimes see from a plane, starleak in the darkness, or a solitary seabird resting on some moonless ocean, poised (wouldn’t Governali love to put it?) above the abyss, yes—on the last branch of a broken faith. Loneliness enlarges thought till it pushes every shadow from my study. In grander moments I think of this space as my skull, and my consciousness as a dinging bell and warning beacon. Who shall be my companion through this fearful early morning? On my diary-troubled desk, Gide has fallen open like an omen, though I do not investigate the text. Instead, I remember how, as a young man, he resented the fact that no one guessed his genius from the look in his eyes, or divined the great works to come; while I worry that what I’ve written will show ini my eyes as plainly as the pupil, and in the shifty color of a bruise. MU, but when did his mirror tell him he’d be pleased to bugger little boys and later make a dirty breast of it? He brags he was lost—lost like a weed in a meadow—lost the day he began his book (the Andre Walter Cahiers, I believe), while I was damned the day I concluded mine (if I can bear to copy my page out like a lesson):
               Thus, neither guilt nor innocence are ontological elements in history; they are merely ideological factors to which a skillful propaganda can seem to lend a causal force, and in that fashion furnish others—in disguise of their greed as it may be, their terror sometimes, pride possibly, remorse even, or, more often, surly resentment—a superficially plausible apologia for tomorrow’s acts of robbery or cowardice, revenge, rape, or other criminalities already under way; because the past cannot promise its future the way a premise stands in line with a ticket good for its conclusion (the past is never a justification, only a poor excuse; it confers no rights, and rights no wrongs; it is even more heartless than Hitler); and if there is a truly diabolical ingredient to events, in the victims and vicissitudes of Time, as has been lately alleged, it lies in the nature of History itself, for it is the chronicle of the cause which causes, not the cause ... as has herein been amply deduced, clearly and repeatedly explained . . . cruelly proved.
      1 let the spoon sink slowly through my soup until I saw it shimmering beneath the surface of the broth like the dappled shadow of a swimmer. The handle warmed my fingers like another finger. And 1 meditated as Monet might have upon
            the painted glitter of a silver fish. Then 1 let the liquid spill steadily from the bowl as 1 brought it to my lips, so that when my smile shut like a shark’s on the emptied spoon, Martha threw down her napkin, rose, and released herself from the room.
            THEN must 1 ink the outlines of my feelings in to keep me company, tear a strip of comedy across the IN1®W§ Off GlnXS WsJOlMl? I’ve all these words around me— worthy and famous, wise and wisely chosen—no comfort—they have not befriended me. For things have taken a strange turn. I have put years—my life—in this work: Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany. I have suffered stuffy light and bad air, rooms as lonely as 1 was, cornered in them; I have endured much weary journeying, scenery postered onto moving windows, twilights in bleak towns, German snowfalls, heavy food, uneasy sleep. I have come down with both flu and nightmare, given my nose nothing, pawned my ears for a bit more vision, yet watched my sight, once so acute, become as worn down as a doorsill or a stair, as though everything I’ve seen and tried to learn had stepped upon my eyes in coming to me. I’ve wrapped wet galoshes in newspapers, read Nazi periodicals in parks, had my privates handled by a boy in Prague who told me, Mister, you’re no bigger here than I am. I’ve had clothing stolen (three balled socks, some underwear, two shirts), and I have taken from the German swans fistfuls of feathers to mail home in my letters, mementos which did not add a penny to the postage and enabled me to dissolve the sweeter of my lies on my tongue. I have given up—and given up—and given up—to get there. It was always the work, the work, the Great Work. And now things have taken a strange turn. I’ve dug patiently through documents, examined testimonies, also taken them, gathered facts and sifted evidence—data swept in endless drifts like snowed clouds— seeking support for my theories, my beautiful opinions, in the diaries of all those destined to be gassed, burned, buried alive, cut apart, shot. . . the journals of those who mourned their possessions more than their murdered and violated wives, in the callous words of those for whom a piece of the fat pork they abhorred meant more than their children’s deboned bodies . . .
            We should not be made to choose. We should not be made to think and say and do such things as I have said / as they have done / as they have chosen / as I have thought. We should not
                                reading on then, shall we end in
                                                                           the years, the words,
          the worries: all for what? a book of beasts?
                        Snow and nightmare. Thievery. Rilke. I ransacked Rilke in my youth, plundered him as if he were a town and 1 a hungry, raunchy troop. It was lust, per-
                         haps—not love but pure possession—I no longer know. I have forgotten, yet 1 labored on him as if he were the body of a woman. I translated. 1 transposed. I had him write—he wrote—oh how I remember—
                     What will you do, God, when I croak?
                     I am your jug (when I am broke?)
                     I am your ale (when I’ve gone flat?)
                     Your daily stint, your feathered hat...
                     You won’t mean nuthin after that.
     Then I threw in a line like an afterthought in a suitcase—
                       If you are laughter, I am joke.
                                    The Funny Papers
       And what support for me emerges from all those heaps? Was my prop, my support, my theory? Easy to suppose. Or is this worry simply wordage? Am 1 postponing the end because endings are my only interest? Occupation is essential. Regarde greed. Inhale hate like hemp. MAD Bi)®§)W§(R% b®w50dl®iiWil®(filGS
                    My ear’s the only area of feeling
                    where your words, so bareass and appealing,
                    are welcome as a room with window candles.
                    I’ll slip from your aching feet there like a pair of super sandals.
    Then why did friends feel that l was trying to empty the jails, salve agenbite with inwit, and unconvict the guilty? when there is nothing genuinely German about me.
       I WONDER. Did my first book corner them—my friends, my heart’s bare legionnaires, my colleagues—corner them in that conclusion so completely
         that even now they can’t be frightened out? It's too late—it’s past all time—to take a broom to the cats.
                          Your fancy cloak will flutter from your bones.
                          The look you laid down on my cheek,
                          the way a head will warm itself upon a pillow,
                          shall seek me vainly high and low,
                          until, just as the day-end sun grows weak,
                          it sinks in some cold lap of lunar stones.
         I enjoyed jerking his pants down—that pompous prig, that dandified prude, that outcast heart, that Orphic pen and lonesome penis, that total poet.
            So now I’m done. This is the moment of release. 1 should dedicate and christen my chef-d’oeuvre and float it forth to flags and bands, waterspouts and whistles, cheering throngs, and yet I find I cannot break a bottle on its prow or waste a drop. Why not, for christ’s sake? Why not?
            Certainly I’m sensitive to the quality of my own work. It cannot bring me less than fame. I also know I shall be cursed. For both, my fat wife waits.
       For both. And so I seat myself and doodle, dream of Mad Meg mumbling in the mob, Mad Meg shaping history with his hands. Martha wonders whether I plan to move my study to the basement. Dirty hands a problem, smutty trousers. Not yet, Marty, old girl. Not yet. So 1 seat myself and commit Culps. I imagine Mad Meg wiping his hands on her plump rump, and 1 smile for the benefit of her displeasure. The basement stairs are gray and worn, the wood so splintery it’s like stepping on brooms to descend, and the following walls are irregular as a dungeon’s, with huge stones sinking as slowly through them as time passes for a prisoner, while, above, the house twists like a hankie in nervous hands. Tabor too. The Meggy Magus. He had hands which grimaced, hands which sneered; he had hands which explained, expostulated, threatened, wept; which touched like buttocks in apparent prayer, which joked, which jeered; hands that danced and sang and held the dagger—creating, conducting, eliciting the word—hands which uttered every innuendo, misled, lied, which latched and locked, insulted and defied; hands which greeted one another like old boozing friends, which squeezed yours unexpectedly and left them wet; outstretched, open, pleading hands crisscrossed by lines for life and love and fate, runnels rushing toward the twiddle finger, fat and ringed, the Mounts of Moon and Mercury rising from a plain of soft pink skin, the Girdle of Venus, too, a Via Lasciva like some Gasse in Hamburg; head, health, heart lines, and all the pulpy cushions of the palm, etched as finely as a counterfeiter’s plate; hands wholly unlike mine, like Pilate’s, water and towel to one
       another, thumbs and fingers disappearing into the shadow of a duck, a fox, a bear, a skirt; hands which were the equal of another’s eye; which were, from time to time, I’m sure, both cunt and cock. We listened, watched. His hands circled his head like birds. We noted, nodded. He drew an Eve from every side—kneading, molding, smoothing, tenderly tracing the final lines, applauding the ultimate form. In his sleight of hands he made it seem so easy. The underhanded art, he said historians had. As if I could make my own life up as simply. Under the tyranny of work, the gentle tyranny of love, I’ve given way. In this house I am afraid of everything.
      Yes, why hold back? The publisher is eager. Thousands of Jews will be offended. A few will not. Most must read it; some will even buy it; there’ll be talk. Surely it will have to dress itself in French and German, come out in England. It will interest the Japanese, though the Russians won’t touch it. It will harrow hearts, and even fascinate philosophers who have none. And the politicians . . . caught in the complicities of power ... my fellow historians . . . staring down those fissures 1 have opened at their feet . . . poets . . . parsons . . . fellow pundits . . . every sort of literary personage, yes ... tap dancers, comics, exhibitionists ... for them a drama on a scale before undreamed of ... a style which murder made, and murderers recite. Why wait?
      Don’t hold back, Lou used to say. Bill, don’t hold back.
      And the memory of Herr Tabor, I’m afraid of that. If I flatten myself like a cat in tall grass, perhaps 1 won’t be seen. Yes. Fear around me like the singing of bees. I described the scene to my friends . . . Ah. Friends. Who, then, were they? these friends. To whom I made my fun of my miracle man. Ha. Friends. But was this sallow, mouth-small Jeanne anyone to speak of Magus Tabor to? of his confusions? his disease? this florid Gerhardt, like a peony, this swarthy Rudy? 1 mocked Meg to please them . . . Krauske, Hintze, Link. And others maybe . . I made my mock, my mockeries ... toy jokes . . . Culps before 1 knew their First & Final Cause . . . ever so conversationally, casually as a back scratch . . . ach, who cares? God knows old Tabor was no damn redeemer— merely vain, poor, miserable, and mean. Yes. “. . . others maybe . . .” My thoughts run back to underline that line. Others like Corresti, for christ’s sake. Like Gleenal, Mullin, Sturm. Mullin—who used to sog doughnuts in his beer. Sturm—ah, these names which fall upon us like the droppings of the birds. And Gleenal, that skinny fairy, only his cock seemed free of consumption. Why should I mind my “maybe”? is it my pride? to be so finicky? I haven’t Marcel’s made-up memory. And there are no longer any nickel souvenirs. Ackermann, Hiatt, Teasor, Lam. What continues me to write this but biology? So I fudged or began to. So what what what what . . . Here where no one knows me, can’t I still lie?
             Yet if I can’t hide the smallest truth, like tunnel dirt, here in this hole—this mouth of mine which words only slowly silt shut—what of my public judgment of the Germans and their Jews? For what is true? only that I have a fat wife, one fatter than myself, with huge boobs, glaciers inching down the forefront of her body. So there were others. Of course there were others. 1 remember protesting to myself that it was too good to keep and too soon for loyalty. And now I have only my colleagues: my Planmantee, my Herschel, my Governali, Culp. My Culp.
                                There was a young blade named Trout, who often got in but not out.
                               He stuck in the sheath when he fucked underneath, and the stick was as tight turned about.
             1 remember... Do 1 remember my parents? I refuse. My family? No, indeed. My childhood? children? birthdays? brothers? Not even appellations, titles, derivations, deaths. 1 remember the scuffs on my shoes. Do I recall the war? the first order given me? the humiliations of obedience? a pride that finally had no elevation in it but lay crushed and treaded as a box run over in the road? I won’t remember. I refuse. And the last man I saw hanged as well, and the last one shot. History has that nice advantage now. We no longer feel obliged to say, “Of the events of the war I have not ventured to speak from chance”; to claim, "I have described nothing but what I saw myself’; or pretend, either, to be composing “a history of great praise.” Nazis? I saw nothing of them. Krauske? pale as empty paper, I wrote over his nose. Link? the final failure of unnoticed light. Spee? a footstep several days old. Flautus Vocis. Noises not to be believed in . . . not to be sounded, not noted, again. Why should their ghosts Banquo me because I made a butt of this heimlich and bezaubemd professor? 1 have undone no one. There is nothing genuinely German about me. 1 merely felt slightly ashamed—a human feeling frequently praised—and so I began—only began, mind you—to compose a little lie about it, to say “maybe” I’d hooted at Mad Meg in the Maelstrom, when in fact I had—I’d babbled about it like a public bubbler in the park. Mon coeur mis a nu.
             “I remember protesting. . .” Did I protest the smashing of windows, the burning of books, the teasing of helpless girls? Did I protest power? Did I protest poetry? Did I protest the poor shine on my shoes? I pretend to remember doing so. Ah, well, then, did I? Did I protest my two sons’ circumcisions? did I? Did I complain when men were beaten for having beards? for wearing skullcaps instead of freshman beanies? for poisoning the pure blood of the race? Did I? Did I protest the schoolyard bully? the coldness of my wife? mass bombing? overeating? public beatings? Did 1? Did I protest red tape?
     black presumption? white whips? useless meetings? hair hysteria? bomb business? the elders of Zion? Zion? Did I? Did I? Do I in these filthy present days when the sincerest work of the world is composing turds?
        But such praiseworthy scrupulosity: to catch myself in cross-examination like a crook. And how that crude word dates me: ‘crook.’ So 1 write that of course there were others, as if it were so natural to talebear that my gossipy betrayal was inevitable, customary, doubtless witty, even right.
        The shelves await their fill. Upon the books the dust is light.
        I hated having a small cock, the bad jokes of small boys upon that point. I hated having a round face like a fat doll. Hitler hated being ordered around. He hated sitting in the failure-seat. He did not learn French. He got bad grades:
                            Moral Conduct: satisfactory Diligence: erratic Religion: adequate Geography & History: adequate Mathematics: inadequate Freehand Drawing: praiseworthy Handwriting: unpleasing
     He hated not being heard, having to shout at the insides of himself, having to live in his dreams the way he lived in one of his rented rooms, being opposed, denied, neglected, refused. Kicked out. He leveled whole towns with a single bolt, and then imagined them rebuilt in his—the future's—image. He was a man made of impatience compelled to be patient, and then suddenly let out like an explosive fart. He said to himself, "I am not incompetent, cold, hungry, poor," though he seemed so—so perfectly—he was so. And he cried out, “You—you others—you do not envision a world over which your thought is more a king than any Haps-burg, therefore you—you others—are the poor ones, the incompetent ones, with cocks as clumsy as clowns ” And I said secretly, “1 am not like any of you." Already my breasts are budding. Ah. Lie still, my soul, like a good dog. Yap not. Snooze.
        Though I trip myself up, what skins when I fall? Nice. So l protested to myself. Ah—nice. Nice. How many were engaged in that dispute? How many of me were there in those days? in the streets of my youth? in the slow soft life? As many as the volumes of Magus Tabor? As many as the works of Zola? Zangwill? Eugene Sue? When young I multiplied [x]. Now I divide [+]. I am a two [2], a twelve [12], a twenty [2 0], hung beneath that skimpy horizontal rod [-] with its skinny upright line [ I ], and there I sway like a rack of out-of-season clothes.
            Sincerely, do I wish for such a life amidst this death—to be the one warm noodle on the plate of macaroni? . . . ummmmmm, thus 1 pretend to turn the problem over. . . ummm, so ... my fork grates upon the plate . . . um, yes. 1
        wish. With my pen’s ultimate breath. It was Gide’s fear. He wondered, worried: would he be sincere? I had a fever, he wrote. My nose bled all day. That was true, no doubt, but was it sincere? What is sincere or not about a nosebleed? Ah, but deciding to say so or not; deciding to set it down, to smear a little blood upon the page . . . how was one to know what was sincere? Is it sincere to lecture yourself—my trade, my chalk-white workday? He gave himself rules like blows: want only one thing! stop puffing up your pride! dare to be yourself! no compromise! Was he sincere, or just a fool? Did he secrete his role in reality like a shell, and later become the snail, as one imagines Rilke did it, going from pose to poet; or did he begin as a sound and then exude some sweet pink conch to lie in like the sea’s ear? He wondered, worried, feared he was mere appearance. Well, he wasn’t born a moralist the way the wasp is born a wasp; no one’s a Prot but on unhappy principle; so we must seek our parts and make our beds, and envy the spider who calmly clouds a web around its world the way the weather does, out of its limitless need, its hunger. Gide upheld this fragrant sentiment— this bonne foi—against the current moral cant, which he claimed was a systematic lie; but what was his sincerity but an excuse to be selfish out of love for a comfortable maxim? It’s a young man’s word against mine.
                            SINCERITY
        I cannot find the right hat for my head, the right mesh vest, leaf for my loins.
                           EMPIRICISM
         It’s true that classicists cannot soil themselves with simple-minded seeing the way empirics do: empirics are too dewy, eager, brash, young, innocent, naive. No. And not because experience couldn’t bring them to wisdom better than the Greeks, either, but because experience is broad and muddy like the Ganges, with the filthy and the holy intermixed in every wash; because it is itself the puzzle and the surd; because it teaches primarily through pain, defeat, disappointment, loss; and these leave a groveler inside the heart; to preside in the spirit, they appoint a hanging judge; and create a resentful cripple in the mind, bent to one side in the continuous clutch of its truth.
                                CLASSICISM
      But the classicist has read too many words to believe in their referents; he has encountered so many intricate ills in his libraries, so many lucid riddles,
       fertile and ravenous as rats, all those terrifying, tormenting testimonies; yes— he has felt up far too many facts during all his reading, in all those books, like a breast through the nubbles of a rough cloth, to have faith in their smooth plain names; yet texts tempt him like a willing woman—they moisten his membranes, elevate his energies; whereas I look for love in knotholes and other rounded ironies, and swing my scrotum like an emptied sack.
                                 CONFESSION
      Gide meant: could he confess upon the page; put into the writer s pretty paper world some creatures whose troubled breathing would betray the fact they were not fictions; record a few feelings in an ink our blood would flow through like a vein? Sincerity—this Christmas wrap around a rascal—could he dispense with even its concealments and reach reality, expose himself to his own eye?
                   THE COMPLETE DISHONEST AND UNWHOLESOME TRUTH
      But words (to be sincere) are what we wretched writers are, whatever our aims: whether some of us are historians like myself, or novelists like Gide; whether it’s a little mild amusement or a vaporous dream which we pretend to dip our pens for, the seduction we so famously provide, an after-luncheon snooze, or simple article of trade; and every one of us knows that within the customarily chaotic realm of language it is often easier to confess to a capital crime, so long as its sentences sing and its features rhyme, than to admit you like to fondle-off into a bottle (to cite an honest-sounding instance), because it’s not like blowing gently across the bottle’s lip to hear the whoo, but an act itself so basically cacophonous it will unsteady the calmest hand; yes—since a flat and wooden style, words nailed like shingles to the page, the earnest straightforward bite of the spike, is the one which suits sincerity; sincerity cannot gambol, cannot play, cannot hedge its bets, forswear a wager, bear to lose; sincerity is tidy; it shits in a paper sack to pretend it’s innocent of food; it cannot quote its masters like Montaigne, or fly its fancy even in a tree, or pun upon a wholesome opportunity, draw up lists like Burton, burst at all its seams; sincerity makes every day dull Sunday, does lump sums, keeps tabs, lies through its honesty like a Bible-beater’s pious threats and Great Good News,
    instead of letting obfuscation and deceit, both rigamarole and simple beauty,
                             *
                           * *
       put pleasure in the punch * 1P@W8* and crooks into the straight; thus Gide
         could not be Gide and be sincere, nor I contain my skeptical and scoffing self like a firefly in a bottle (q.v.)—its intermittent gleam an imprisoned promise behind the glass—and be sincere.
                            March 11, 1943. The evacuation of Jews from Berlin has led to a number of untoward happenings. Unfortunately a number of Jews and Jewesses from privileged marriages were also arrested, thereby causing fear and confusion. The scheduled arrest of all Jews on one day has proven a flash in the pan because of the shortsighted behavior of industrialists who warned the Jews in time. We therefore failed to lay our hands on about 4,000. They are now wandering around Berlin without homes, are not registered with the police and are naturally quite a public danger. I ordered the police, Wehr-macht, and the Party to do everything possible to round these Jews up as quickly as practicable.
           I remember, as a boy, being taken fishing by my father. Brown trout lay hidden in little stone holes like the complete expression of a wish, and disappeared at the rude intrusion of my shadow even before my bait dropped like a schoolboy’s casual pebble in the water. A whisper would frighten these fish, a footstep, any clatter, so that all 1 saw of them was the ripples where they’d been. My father was annoyed with me and my meptness—furious, in fact, for I had fallen into his life, too, ploppily disturbed its peace—but this time his complaints lay quietly inside the fullness of his cheeks, and merely reddened their skin. 1 sat down sullenly on a rock and let him go on alone. He was away for some time, but after the menace of his absence had subsided 1 was able to look calmly about me at the grasses, ferns, and trees; and, in a silence so still my breath was a breeze, register the quality of every quiver in their delicate fronds and thin stems. There were weeds like wild hair, indefatigable ivy, gold and purple seeds, blue bells. The washed bowls of the pools gleamed like teaspoons, and I could easily see grains of sand crawling slowly along a bottom from which the light rose like a cloud of steam, while the water itself seemed to stand above the eroded stone as if it were air—another atmosphere—the medium of a different sort of life. 1 leaned over ledges, studied moss and minnows, followed the path of the stream down its smooth warm sides, watched a leaf like a bather (behavior quite ill suited to my nature), and scooped up a flutter of sun with one swift motion—gotcha. When my father returned, himself empty-handed, I caught hell.
           From the long entry of September 23, 1943:
                        I then posed the very serious and important question to the Fiihrer as to how far he intends to extend the Reich. His idea
                        is that we ought to advance as far as the Venetian border, and that Venetia should be included in the Reich in a sort of loose federation. Venetia would be all the more willing to accept this, since the Reich alone would be able after a successful war to supply it with tourist trade, to which Venice attaches the greatest importance.
            I saw a sugar gum whose ancient branches fell like gray rain through its leaves.
                  FUHRER FULL OF IT
                         The Fiihrer is full of praise for Seyss-lnquart. He governs the Netherlands very cleverly; he alternates wisely between gentleness and severity, thereby indicating that he has had excellent Austrian schooling.
             FUHRER WOULD GO OUT IN EVE
                  The yearning for peace, widespread among the German people, is also to be discerned among other peoples. All peoples are human, and after four years of war nobody sees any fun in it. Personally, too, we are yearning for peace. The Fiihrer stressed this. He said he would be happy to have contact with artistic circles again, to go to the theater in the evening and to visit the Artists’ Club.
                                   and now
               THE RED-SKINNED CORPSE OF SINCERITY
           Those mute white mounds of Jews: they were sincere. And to the right nose, what is not a corpse? To a rat, what is not food? rat tat General weathering plays some part, 1 said—wind, rain, thaw, freeze, a mean muttering mouth like the flow of water in that stream: each wears a little of the world out; corpses by the carload, by the ditchful, fieldful, hill high, death like a steady patient drip or the dogged footstep of the pilgrim: rat tat they reduce us; executioners working anonymously away like ants about their beelike business, tat similes sold as slaves, verbs rusting like old cars, a yearlong winter of shit like sleet from an asshole of ice, hail and shame storms: they
          smooth us; they plane us down; a scream of sand in a howl of air, the repeated rub of erasers, picked-at skin scabs, trouser shine, crotch itch, fondle bruise, or that coy batting of the eye which wearies what it sees: rat tat tat tat they shave us; the grip of the cigar in the same cold corner of the mouth may cause cancer, tat the lonely lodger in his rented room (ah! portrait of millstream in moonlight, tat summer-stuck drawer, tat crumbs from a store-bought cookie, tat imprint of despair on the unmade bed, tat stained satin shade, rat tat sock soaked with cum) ah! may become murderous, so look out for a dry spell rather longer than Egypt’s, for fire, for flood (it’s a routine of history)—and 1 remember those darkened days, when rivers ran with blood like veins (1 remember, ole Mose), those frogs and centipedes and snakes, the locusts and chiggers and flies, cheeseless holes defined by rhino rinds, O those politicos and their speeches as wormy as pork, boils on the balls of the eyes—so look out, because dJHMKSlUEAM SdOlfflT® BMflUKO^CH K@SS[n][I05 <2®(£lf£S (we know how [we know] O), with their sloughs of despond, a row of ruts like the rounds of a record, O with a malaise of malarkey, with a plague of poets, tat “din of desire,” one wrote, what rot, rat tat tat till, seasoned by beatings, prepared by starvation and disease, bodies were produced O by the board foot, uniformly uniformless, with shriveled members, darkened memories, cardboard hearts and sunken chests, large eyes, thin limbs, bald heads the lice have left, idle open mouths the wind will blow rain in ah! so that they are now neatly the same size, same age, same sex (and lighter, too, by the weight of the soul), tat corpses stacked like cordwood
                                       to marry?
                                 but is it really better? burning is such a bother
         well WHAT ELSE? dry spiteful speech, jailed conjunctions, metaphors machine-gunned where they stood, rat tat tat tat bayoneted underwear, famine, fevers burning what’s within, prepositions lying in the fields, ell-bones showing through their kinks and connections, snow in the south, trench mouth in the north, shrouds on the soldiers advancing on Finland, waves of remorse, tides of verse and floods of piss, garish and pimpy rhymes, rotting teeth and silver-filled feelings, painted nails, cruel valentines, inappropriate gifts, reproachful children, a fungus forming in every crack, within a grin or course of brick, in any line, a letch for anal copulation with cliches, with the elderly and infants, with little iiiits, tat epidemics of typhus or the trots, tat outbreaks of tantrums, tat the giggles, tat tat violent sneezing, tat tat tat tat tat tat O cocks consumed by their sucking, ah! utter apathy, outbreaks of silence, a steady unoccluded sun, depressed italics, terror, quakes in the inner ear: adverbs consequently fallen on by nouns, real—worse—symbolic rapes by the
      same vague smegma’d shape, loyalty 0 loyalty licked by a treasonous tongue, total word war, tat and letters which have thrown away their arms and fled the front, tat not to mention tat those lost in service tat down in the fight, all the Hill’s gone into the repeated spelling of ‘hell,’ so we are -eft with -ife and -aw and -ove and -onging, -itt-e more, as if our thought were starting over in its mewling infancy, inside its seed, although the spirit, ah! the spirit, O the spirit has stopped, tat. stopped, like Woody the Butcher Boy’s Block stops the cleaver           or a sand-jammed gun goes snick, down dog, down tock,
      down hickory dick. tat. stopped, tat. stopped, an eon °° empire °° ages °° egos ago. please: a morning only > please: a moment more > please: a breath before at last! the long Last tat or after tat WHAT? on liptoe WHAT? at liptip WHAT? at pitlip 0 in limeslime What? what? what?
        ©®DD®(r®ll WsatttarSfil®, sir! What a nobilitating title! Yes. For the war of elements. Yes. What a foofaracious nomination! Yes. For the heart s rage. Yes. What a flatulent vocisl What a noxious wordturd! Yes. I see typhoons of wind-driven saliva; notions blown away like birds to light before strange eyes on stranger trees in stranger minds. The edges of distinctions fray, General. General, the centers of our symbols wear like stairs. Sounds, like meat, slide off their bones, and a word written ‘body,’ if often enough stepped on—stomped, kicked, scuffed, screwed—is soon smooth as ‘ooove’ as it hastens away in the hollow shape of a whistle. Syllables catch fire, General. Towns do. Concepts are pulled apart like the joints of a chicken. Sub-stance. Listen to the mind munch. Consonants, General, explode like grenades. Vowels rot in some soft southern mouth, and meaning escapes from those oooos as from an ass. And I d my privates pulled on by a boy in Prague who told me, Mister . . .
        To pull a part. Hear that? A part ... to play ... my turn to play ... my god. I slide into the words I write—a victim of Forster’s syndrome. How could my thought have contained them? When not believing has been my business? When adding up grief, numbering loss, has been my job? 1 have fed too much death to the mouth and matter of my life, and so have grown up a ghost. Dough ray me faugh so law tee hee, 1 sang, when 1 had to learn the scales as a kid. Dee . . . De-composition. Dee . . . De-crees. Just sign. On the gently sloping . . . on the slotted line.
                                     By Silverspoon Lake at lilac time I’ll drown your cat if you’ll drown mine
        It is a German’s spoon, with a long hooked handle—like a Jew's nose—it hangs by, and it skims the scum from the soup; it lifts off what’s obscene; it clears
       one's head of unmanly sentiments; it leaves the broth both pure and resolute; it keeps the low wound clean; for we must remember thatgood blood is the most priceless possession of the State, tat. It is the name of a jape—this life and what I write—a jolly jest or collegiate rag, a blue-class pastime like bowling, an ideal joke, good gag, a children’s game, some youthful prank or gentlemanly gambit, clever con or hanky-panky, and here is a role for
                      TIME
                                   jewel of my heart
                      SPACE
                                   smile of my eye
                      MATTER
                                   lie in my arms
                      MOTION
                                   till Time pants by
                      LAW
              In the Funnies
          (Enter Time [as a scythe], stage left.)               (Enter the Wife, stage right.)
                                             Put part into part.
       Before me now is an unopened volume of Stefan George ... in the air the odor of boiling cabbage coming from the kitchen where Martha stirs me like a kettle.
                                            in our canoe we'll cup like spoons in a jangle of metal and a call of loons
                              Para. 1
                              1. Jews may receive only those first names which are listed in the directives of the Ministry of the Interior concerning the use of first names.
                 Put part upon part like a sticky stack of pans or pile of sweet cakes.
                             2. This provision does not apply to Jews of a foreign nationality.
           Pant. Puff. Pant. As one sees them do in the comics, or in sorrowful wet dreams.
                          Para. 2
                        1. If lews should bear first names other than those permitted to Jews according to Para. 1, they must, as of Jan. 1,
                     1939, adopt an additional name. For males, that name shall be Israel, for females Sara.
                                    Come apart, tight, tat.
          Early every Sunday Morning I would toe it past the pesky noisesome creaks which weather and age had secreted in our stairs to open the front door and snatch the Sunday paper through the one cautious crack I allowed myself—narrow because 1 was naked. Half-light shadowed the rug like lace. I was always silent as a snake since I thought if I woke my parents at such an hour they would surely decide there was time enough for all of us to go to church, or worse, that there was time enough for me to be hauled off to Sunday school—the ultimate humiliation—where I would sit in a gently rounded row of little folding chairs set up in a damp and badly painted, cutesy-pie basement cubicle, and promise a moist-eyed, pin-haired lady to be as good as gold and as God, my Father, wished, or sullenly let myself be cajoled into saying a prayer for the poor, or singing something icky about baby Jesus, or guessing the significance of the sappy smile which tradition had fixed to the overchromed features of the Virgin, where she lay faceup in a penny leaflet we were routinely, on arriving, handed. Staring between our knees we said the Lord’s Prayer. The bulb-lit floor seemed ready to go out. My knees grew as we murmured together, and by the time we reached temptation they seemed swollen the size of softballs. Alice in her tunnel could not have improved on the phenomenon. We colored Daniel grinning smugly in his lions’ den (red for the great open mouths of the beasts, orange for the pelts, yellow for their teeth), and we learned the meaning, with Joseph, of all those dreams. My father gave me a dime for the collection, a nickel of which I spent on candy at a nearby drugstore, and a nickel of which I placed, the buffalo grazing, in the middle of a plate 1 pretended was a prairie. At the front of my candy store various city papers would be piled in satisfying stacks, each
           wrapped with brightly colored funnies or in the deep sepias of the rotogravure.
           So 1 suffered a little anxiety, Sunday Mornings, until I could be certain that the old man and my mother were going to sleep through Jesus and Jerry, and then 1 somersaulted into the bright arc of midday, full of relief and happy anticipation of an open and endless afternoon. Yet the day’s decorum was like dusk in the morning, and half of the world was closed. One’s friends were with relatives or in the country. The sick beckoned with a trembling finger. The lavender ink was got out, and notes of condolence were composed. The radio played “Ave Maria” or went on about politics. My aunt fell asleep at her jigsaw puzzle; my mother mended my pants; father continued through the paper like one on safari. “Look what’s happened to Phelps-Dodge. Down another dollar." In the kitchen, plates scraped clean of yellow gravy, chicken bones and puckered skin, lay in the sink. And my homework had been put off. Again.
           It was, I realized later, a day devoted to suffering through the conventional cycle of our sentiments about life, although the drama would not be as elaborately staged as Shakespeare had presented it, since he was more concerned, in that famous speech, with role or station than with mood and emotion alone; nor did it begin with the mewling puking infant, but with that eager, nervous youth, instead, who was half whining schoolboy, half a woeful lover like myself, with a passion for stealth, subterfuge, and superficiality, which was an apt match for those characters in Dime Novels or on the comics page; exclusively a paper hero, nonetheless, fearful yet hopeful as a laboratory mouse, and as easily roused as a shallow lake by any blow—in all, a mix of the Real, Romantic, and Disillusioned, which was much like the lemonade 1 made to sell at our curb in summer, beneath our cooling trees, for five cents a dinky Dixie cup, each cup rewashed at the outdoor tap until it was flimpy and buckled in the hand the way the day did.
           The exuberant white peak was next, the pinnacle inside oneself, just as the mountaineering books had described it for me, where you stood in triumph if only for a moment, burned by the wind, but absurdly elevated by the height achieved, dazzled by the illusion of freedom and flight, when you were actually drowning in distance like a midge on the moon.
        And this transcendental moment was routinely followed by that listless descent down the pallid slope of some supremely ordinary Sunday afternoon (though it was fitting that the hour hand should also sink, as if it were mercury marking, twice a day, the yearly approach of winter)—O it was a yawn across a chasm—it was my waiting for the echo of that yawn—and yet it was also an afternoon through which 1 sometimes raked the yard or burned leaves without once considering the nature of loss, grief, loneliness, or even invoking the po-
        etry of change. In fact, despite my mood, I rather enjoyed the deep red flakes of fire the leaves became, the blue smoke too, like an Indian signal, although my head was clogged with the certainty, as if I'd come down with a cold, that everything would soon be over; that the open hours ahead of me were closing like a store; my free and undemanding time was passing as unboarded as a train; or that my pure, uncomplicated play—my movie, ballgame, picnic, the Wild West 1 daydreamed, the robbery of a train—or the sweet world of wish and rich invention—was coming to an end as every holiday does, and ending emptily, too—pushed out with a grunt like the last stool; and, of course, this conviction ate at life’s advancing edge the way a worm gnaws at a leaf; it shriveled the imagination like a frightened penis; for what could one hope to catch and keep of life with such a weakened net, or forlorn fling? so one suffered through one’s forties every seventh day, and became an accountant, as 1 have done, in self-defense: weighing the light lick the tongue first gave the cone, the cunt, the honey spoon, the licorice stick, against the envelope it wet, the postage stamp, dry nervous lips; measuring a few great words read right against the accumulated weight of the wishy-washy, of tons of trivia and tedium, of Nothing itself—the melancholy experience of pure duree.
        From the surly age of twelve I looked back upon eleven with disdain, but from the midst of any birthday hullabaloo (that was the word), I could push my gaze between those frilly-skirted girls, with their false and fulsome sweaters, past the "Hit Parade" and all our fatty adolescent tee hee, to observe my future self standing in front of a rented room in a tired suit, sad hat, and listless shirt, holding a single scruffy bag, with the hand that hid the handle hid in a sleeve, and 1 could even see how that figure (it's my image, right enough, thinner in the face but fuller in the trunk) slowly turns to peer down a long door-lined corridor done in dull brown and stained, worn, carpet green toward a dim red sign at the end which says EXIT, feeling the candy bar soft in its pocket before finding the key.
           Evening was a little easier on the mind. What was lost was lost, though the bitterness remained. Supper would be cold cuts and potato salad and yellow cheese. After supper the radio filled us with its joviality, and between jokes I would try to complete my work Usually it went well enough, but sometimes the concentration was not there, or I was stubbornly unwilling, or often, when it was algebra or geometry, 1 simply did not follow or figure aright, but ran from premise to proof like the piper’s son. 1 had no patience then (now my patience is that of the spider), and 1 fiercely resented seeming stupid, so 1 would soon fall out with my father, who now and then agreed with Euclid that 1 was dumb to a degree beyond even Edison’s ability to invent a measure, and wanted to be the only one allowed to grumble and go on about it. 1 always listened to the news, and hoped the Hindenberg would blow up again. In bed I flew planes
            and dropped bombs. The opportunity for fantasy was endless, and already I was conceiving hidden castles, secret fortresses, underground hideouts, and other militant securities. Or gunned at hip, boot, and underarm, I took the early morning stage. Or swung by one arm through the trees. Sometimes I sullenly recited something I was supposed to learn, and sleep was a seltzerously swift relief from the headaches and labor of lessons.
                              Para. 3
                              1. Jews [see Para. 5 of the First Executive Decree concerning the Reich Citizenship Law of November 14, 1935; Official Gazette, p. 1333] over the age of six are forbidden to show themselves in public without a Jew’s star.
Male Female Names
                                                                                                Names
                                                                                             Abimelech
                             Bachja
                           Chaggi
                          Denny
                          Ehud
JHtach Henoch Gedalja Faleg Ahasver Barak Fertel Hemor Driesel Machle Jacusiel Korach Mac hoi Pessel Reitzsche Naftali Nochem Scheindel
Treibe Keile Kaleb Mikele Nacha Pesse Rebekka Schlaemche Tana Zipora
  Abigail
      Bade
      Cheiche
        Deiche
          Egele
            Fradchen Ginendei Hitzel Jezebel Chajin Bsig Breine Chana Gaugel Itzig Jomteb Leiser Periche Redid Mosche Moses Oscher
             Zhnie Zilla Una Pinchas Ubschd Laban Menachem Nissi Pinkus Rachmid
Teit Schnur Zedek
                                 00031
                2. The Jew's star consists of a six-pointed star of yellow cloth with black borders, equivalent in size to the palm of the hand. The inscription is to read “Jew” in black letters. K is to be sewn to the left breast of the garment, and to be worn visibly.
  I write these names down slowly, as if 1 cared, forming the letters with a certain calm disdain. I arrange them emblematically (for am I not at play?), forming a star my imagination floods with yellow like urine. It gives me pleasure. They are strange names, for the most part; dug out of biblical crannies like tiny obstinate weeds. These are the names given demons in magical spells, filthy names, names so Jewish even their noses are hooked, their skins are swarthy; look at the kinks in those k's, the low craft and chicanery characteristic of z: 1 command you, Abimelech, appear with your cohorts, the witches Chinke and Keile, the imps Zedek and Itzig, the succubae Hitzel and Milkele, the whores, the Jezebels, Rebekka and Chiniche, cunts in their throats to howl with, and the fur like a necklace, smile atop slit like a T made of lip, presenting our lusts with a puzzle: which mouth to kiss? which wound to dress? which opening to enter? which boon to bless? which curse to caress?
  This star, this shape, is like my book, my history of Hitler and his henchmen (their homosexual hearts, their hermaphrodite designs), and exposes itself the way my work exposes the parts and conditions of their crime; for the carefully conventional appearance of my manuscript—so Buck, so Boche—the resonance of its title, Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany, its soberly documented form, its piling up of day upon decade like shit in a stable, its powerful logic like the stench from there (has there ever been such an unpleasant assembly of facts?), and then its lofty hierarchy of explanations, as though it were a government bureau, the anal tables of statistics, too, and weighty apparatus of referral: they straighten the teeth of the truth; they impose an order on accident, find a will in history as fiery as phlogiston (what is chapterlike about tyranny but the beatings and decrees? how much of life is simply consecutive like forks of food, as straightforward and declarative as my disciplined academic style? everything is both simultaneous and continuous and intermittent and mixed; no tattooed numbers, no leather love-thongs, mark the page); ah, my book cries out its commands, and events are disposed like decorative raisins on a cookie (that row there is the mouth, and there’s an eye); it huffs the wind it flaps in, and soon all fog is blown from circumstance, confusion is scarred from the corn, an empty field is ringed with quotes like barbarous wire; well, in the same way this pretty pattern of names removes disgust from a dozen dossiers, rips up some threatening proclamations, decorates death like a pennant on a spear.
   In the hands of my friend Culp, what does the limerick do to history?
                           There once was a camp called Auschwitz, where the Germans continued their Jew-blitz.
                                Their aim was the same if they shot, gassed, or maimed;
                             while gold was reclaimed from the teeth that remained, and they sold off the hair for a few bits.
   So 1 have written off the Reich. Shall 1 now write off life in a chair, that chair which held me while I explained just how and why the Holocaust occurred . . . cited that smelly assembly of circumstances . . . toured the disciplined buildings which hid all those soured hearts and misshapen hopes . . . apportioned blame like pieced pie?
   O, it would be a domestic epic indeed, and unique in the literature, one that took place entirely in the mind—on the john, in a bathtub, chair, or darkened room, upon a sleepless bed; because historians never leave Congress or the president for the simple white houses of home. Their firmament must glitter; they believe in the planets, and neither cottage nor hut has chandeliers, satin women, canapes; but time goes by in gas jet or candle flicker just as evenly as under crystal; bulb light and lamp shadow can serve as sun and dial where the real clock is a dirty dish; any steady leak will do to die in, inasmuch as time circulates in the local manner of our blood, through this and that particular poor body constantly; it does not pop in and out of things like the dime-a-day novels of a lending library, nor does it flow through the veins of the chess club or any other artificial body—prick them, they will not bleed.
   Ah Culp, my compulsive rhymer, the difference is considerable. You see, I say, sloshing coffee around in my cup, for the first time .. .for the first time in history, 1 admonish him, an ordinary people's private life has had massive public consequences. That’s true, Herschel says. 1 wish the simp would shut up. The masses have tilted the world before, Planmantee says. I think he is right: during ages of ice. Let’s start the meeting, please, Governali says. Oh sure, I say, oh sure, they’ve weighed—fluff weighs, water weighs—they’ve weighed because circumstance has cut them down like grass, baled them like hay ... At last, Plan exclaims, an agricultural theory of history. Light lies in puddles on the table. I cannot explain its liquidity. The windows are as gray as the sky. Culp’s long brown fingers intertwine. Culp has a sheaf of notes in front of him. Culp? Notes? Planmantee will read a prepared statement from a tablet. Famine is a public, not a private, fact. . . Why can’t Governali put his briefcase on the floor like everyone else?
The masses . . . Why does he wear a tie if he’s always going to loosen it? In the old days they were merely bellies big with bloat, I say. They had historically insignificant insides. Let’s start the meeting, please, okay? Plan never learns, Culp says. Who's not here? We re all here. We’re only the executive committee. Ah, so it’s easy for us all to be here. The masses. . . they . . . Governali is reading his mail, smiling as if every envelope contained a compliment. Planmantee is going to sit across from me. That means I'm going to be hectored. 1 refuse to be ignored like this. Herschel is blocking his hat—some Russian thing that looks like an elephant's muff. There are puddles of snow on the floor. Good, Plan has set his case in one. It’s a burgher’s world we live in now, I say. The dust of the shop is its visible air. Im Haus is where the porridge waits for Goldilocks. Did you bring that memo, Henry? the new one, the . . . The spirit of our age . . . Ja, in das double Bett is everything prefigured and prescrewed. Culp loves to butt in—the swine-hund. Okay—I called this meeting because—okay, let’s—So if . . . There seems to have been some fundamental difference of opinion— ... we must study the fascism of the heart . . . Ah, a glorious phrase, Governali exclaims, folding a piece of flimsy pink paper, and reinserting it in its square blue envelope. And the resentment of the foot, too, I imagine, Planmantee says, lifting one of his, for so it was that the boot brought comfort to the Hun’s hoof and war to us, nicht wahr?
                                 00033
  So. Another day. Another. A Tuesday.
  And I’ve shuffled through my manuscript again. I lift the sheets and then 1 lay them down. It may be that I’ve accomplished only half my task. 1 have not, like my colleagues, overlooked the real arena, but haven’t I given my results the neat and compact body of a book? Haven’t 1 arranged my weeds like a court garden? Certainly I’ve not rescued (3®<s]9® ©r®aift HDQIKSfprfM from a pile of soggy discards. I’ve not done that. I can’t offer the reader Nature seen as a dump for divine signs. Only the foolish and the cruel can believe in Supreme Sovereigns now. I haven’t pasted up some poster showing a litho-nippled Providence grimly dicing us home as though we were counters on a board game— nothing so trivial or so grand. Yet, despite my care, my misgivings ... I’m afraid that willy-nilly I’ve contrived for history a book’s sewn spine, a book’s soft closure, its comfortable oblong handweight, when it ought to be heavier than Hercules could heft. History is relentless, but now it has a volume’s uninsistent kind of time. And hasn’t the guilt and innocence I speak of there become a simple succession of paper pages?
  We read, and therefore see before us a great mound of earth which bulldozers have gouged from the ground; only, of course, prisoners have dug the hole whose hollow it represents, just as these pages, I notice, pile up to mark my new obses-
sion. In front of the mound: a mile of naked strangers. In groups of twenty, like smokes, they are directed to the other side by a man with a truncheon and a whip. It will not help to ink in his face. Several men with barrows collect clothes. There are young women still with attractive breasts. There are family groups, many small children crying quietly, tears oozing from their eyes like sweat. In whispers people comfort one another. Soon, they say. Soon. No one wails and no one begs. Arms mingle with other arms like fallen limbs, lie like shawls across bony shoulders. A loose gray calm descends. It will be soon . . . soon. A grandmother coos at the infant she cuddles, her gray hair hiding all but the feet. The baby giggles when it’s chucked. A father speaks earnestly to his son and points at the heavens where surely there is an explanation; it is doubtless their true destination. The color of the sky cannot be colored in. So the son is lied to right up to the last. Father does not cup his boy’s wet cheeks in his hands and say, You shall die, my son, and never be remembered. The little salamander you were frightened of at first, and grew to love and buried in the garden, the long walk to school your legs learned, what shape our daily life, our short love, gave you, the meaning of your noisy harmless games, every small sensation that went to make your eager and persistent gazing will be gone; not simply the butterflies you fancied, or the bodies you yearned to see uncovered—look, there they are: the inner thighs, the nipples, pubes—or what we all might have finally gained from the toys you treasured, the dreams you peopled, but especially your scarcely budded eyes, and that rich and gentle quality of consciousness which I hoped one day would have been uniquely yours like the most subtle of flavors—the skin, the juice, the sweet pulp of a fine fruit—well, son, your possibilities, as unrealized as the erections of your penis—in a moment—soon—will be ground out like a burnt wet butt beneath a callous boot and disappear in the dirt. Only our numbers will be remembered—not that you or I died, but that there were so many of us. And that we were
  we were, weren’t we? we? we were, we were once, we were, were —orderly, quiet, dignified, brave. On the other side of the mound, where two young women and the grandmother are going now, the dead have placed themselves in neat rows across an acre-square grave. The next victims clamber awkwardly to the top of the pile where they’ll be shot by a young man with a submachine gun and a cigarette. Some of the dead have not yet died. They tremble their heads and elevate their arms, and their pardons are begged as they’re stepped on; however, the wounded worry only that the earth will cover their open eyes; they want to be shot again; but the bullets bring down only those above them, and for a few the weight is eventually so great it crushes their chests. How nice and white death is. So serene. I close the book to answer the phone.
                  Sometimes a foot slips on the blood-wet bodies, and a fat woman slides face forward down the stack when she is hit. As the next line climbs, there are quiet
words to the wounded, and an occasional caress. From the gunman’s end, of course, the mound looks like a field full of false hair. Millions die eventually, in all ways. Millions. What songs, what paintings, poems, arts of playing, were also buried with them, and in what number? who knows what inventions, notions, new discoveries, were interred, burned, drowned? what pleasures for us all bled to death on the ice of a Finnish lake? what fine loaves both baked and eaten, acres of cake; what rich emotions we might later share; how many hours of love were lost, like sand down a glass, through even the tiniest shrapnel puncture?
   Of course one must count the loss of a lot of mean and silly carking too. Thousands of thieves, murderers, shylocks, con men, homos, hoboes, wastrels, peevish clerks, shysters, drunkards, hopheads, Don Juans, pipsqueaks, debtors, premature ejaculators, epileptics, fibbers, frigid females, faddists, nags, nail-biters and bed wetters, frumps, fanatics, friggers, bullies, cripples, fancy ladies, got their just deserts, and were hacked apart or poisoned, driven mad or raped and even sabered, or simply stood in a field and starved like wheat without water; and we shall never know how many callow effusions we were spared by a cutthroat; how many slanderous tongues were severed; what sentimental love songs were choked off as though in mid-note by the rope; the number of the statues of Jesus, Mary, or the pope, whose making was prevented by an opportune blindness or the breaking of the right bones; what canvases depicting mill wheels in moonlight, cattle at dawn, children and dogs, lay unexecuted on their easels because of the gas, talent thrown out as if it were the random pissing of paint into a bedpan; so that, over all, and on sober balance, there could have been a decided gain; yet there is always the troublesome, the cowardly, midnight thought that a Milton might have been rendered mute and inglorious by an errant bullet through the womb; that some infant, who, as a precocious young man, might conceive a Sistine ceiling for the world, and humble us all with his genius, as he made us proud of our common humanity . . . well, there is always the fear that this not-yet youth has been halved like a peach; that Vermeer, Calderon, or Baudelaire, Frege or Fourier (Degas was safely an anti-Semite), could conceivably, oh yes, just might possibly (Wagnerians need never worry), have (Heidegger will be okay, and all his ilk) been (Celine hates with too much style, but his heart is in the right sink) gently carried to his death between a pair of gray-haired arms, which, otherwise, were no longer even strong enough to disturb a clear soup.
   "Orderly. "Quiet. “Dignified.” "Brave. Herschel says these words softly, as if to impress me with his solemnity. This is the sort of report which touches him: it is Hermann Graebe’s much quoted description of the death pit near Dubno, and 1 repeated these words for just that reason. No one can complain of Herschel’s response. They were brave. They were dignified and orderly. They
were impressively superior to the criminals who killed them—to Hermann Graebe himself, the German engineer who witnessed it all and wrote about it so straightforwardly, with a kind of wonder, as if he had observed the smother of a hive of bees. This engineer reminds me of Kafka's neutral note-taker whose account of the punishment machine in The Penal Colony is so harrowing. (Culp, alas, is my personal and particular sting.) Anyway, one cannot deny Her-schel his point. These people were brave. They were dignified and orderly. They were. They died in noble difference from the Hun. Yet should they have been so peaceful and quiet, Henry, I ask him. Or should they have been screaming and clawing at the heavens till the sky ran red? Shouldn't they have scattered, those hundreds, in every direction like a flock of chickens from a stone? The Jews in Warsaw died, too, Herschel, but for days they occupied an army. Herschel smiles in that tentative soft way he has. He has learned to expect the return of my mind like a swing, but he has not gotten used to the arc of it. 1 tell him that their bravery was the bravery of the bullock who dies beneath the yoke, but Henry will not accept my comparison. These poor people had only one choice, he tells me—how they would leave life—and they chose nobly. While the Nazis were subtracting from the total of humanity, in every sense, their victims were acting to its credit, and balancing the books. Bal- balancing the books! No, Hershey, no. The Germans should have had to sweep those bodies up like a cup of spilled rice. And they had no brooms, see? They would have had to pick every piece up between tweezing nails. Who pays you to die with patience, Hersch, eh? Death does. They were brave—sure. Dignified. Yet they went into the ground like sacks of fertilizer. Polite as patients, all right, and as though disciplined by their doctors, they kicked up no fuss and died quietly as a wind. Herschel offers me another smile like the last chocolate on the plate. It tells me that my observations are appreciated, although they do not change him. He loses his opinions no better than I lose weight. If, since the day Nietzsche composed the cliche and advanced the hope, Henry, all real belief in God is gone like the last garrulous guest, then it stands to reason that, following the Holocaust, all real belief in Man must wither too. His jaw moves slowly shut behind his jowls. Someone has slipped the last smile from its little paper cuff. Of course I cannot mean what I say, so he is wondering what my motive is. Well, 1 am lenfant terrible d un certain age.
   What does it all add up to, then, if it doesn’t balance, Herschel finally asks me. i corpse, Henry, 1 say; i corpse, small or large, + i corpse, fat or thin, = 2 corpses for the greedy crows, but who knows how many beaks two bodies will support? i person who climbs calmly to the top of that blood-slick heap + another person who climbs up + still another who does so = 3 who did it. Those acts add, Hershey. Apples add. Ammo expended. Miles regained. Lengths of
gauze. Burlaps packed with hair. 3, 13, 30 crawled up. And these same 3 probably pushed and shoved in the meat market and wouldn’t stay in the queue. These 13 doubtless divided their village with vicious gossip. These 30 believed that gypsies lie, steal horses and money and bedclothes and children, and keep in one socket an evil eye. That’s what doesn't add, Henry. Up or down, it doesn't add. Put a single green bean alongside another, and we have that neutral dull green sum again, but what if one of them comes from a fairy tale? Gray-haired granny was, in peaceful life, a tyrannical bitch, a dry lay, a devoted friend and Catholic, a rotten cook, a splendid seamstress (at which she made her living, and the living of her alcoholic husband); she was a grumbling gardener, a lover of dogs, and a stealer of sweets. The machine gunner is a nice young lad from Bebenhausen where he delivered groceries on his bicycle to stay-at-homes and shut-ins. The kid with the whip, on the other hand, has a record as long as your favorite sausage. He really loves squinting at these naked and defenseless girls, and he has dreams of lying doggo in the pile and fucking every hole he can get his cock in as the gun goes herrattattat above him and he goes harumpumpump below him until dirtfall when he’ll creep away out of the bodies he’s buggered covered with blood as though he'd been in a battle. He’s the one at his trial who'll say to the court:
                  As a Christian and a boy i read through the passage which relates how the Lord at last rallied his strength and reached for the whip to drive the usurers, that brood of adders and otters, out of the temple! Profoundly moved after two thousand years, I recognize the tremendous import of Our Fiihrer’s fight to save the world from the Jewish poison.
And no one will realize he’s simply quoting the Fiihrer. The good go bad, and the bad get worse. That's the vulgar formula, Hersch, so take your pick of the culls, the spoiled, the bruised. If we were leaves, Herschel, 1 sort of said, and there were only one wind, why then we might predict the path of our blowing; but we live in a world of whirling air just as Anaximenes concluded, a world of whiffs, puffs, breaths, zephyrs, breezes, hurricanes, monsoons, and mistrals; and if they all died away suddenly, and we were Sargasso’d in a sea of circumstance, then one small draft through a winter window might drive us at our destiny like a nail.
   The idea that flutters down to me now—that there are both active and passive virtues, virtues of struggle and of acquiescence—pale as it is, like a bleached leaf, I received first, as 1 vaguely remember it, from the thin straight lips of Jerry—what was his name?—the Presbyterian minister I sometimes
heard preach on those occasions when, after Sunday school, like a poor wretch, 1 had to accompany my parents to church.
   Jerry. I have only the dimmest recollection of what he looked like, what he said, or even how he spoke, but the memory of his eloquence still warms me like a blush; and 1 was a bit embarrassed by it then too, 1 remember, because it didn’t seem proper for a skeptical schoolboy to be moved by mere thoughts, by morals drawn as crudely as political cartoons, especially when I so expressly preferred the funnies on a Sunday.
   Life in a pew. The seats were hard, of course, and unless I sat on the rounded edge, my feet wouldn't reach the floor. The church was plain, the pulpit unadorned, the choir small. I hated the prayers which went on and on while I studied the backs of necks, or the strangely detached toes which had fallen out of my trousers, or the little sheet which stated the order of service. (The sermon might be titled “Our Six Days of Vacation and Our One of Work,’ or once, “Fmageddon,” which nobody understood.) I hated the hymns (which I called “hummms” because that’s what 1 did with them). I disliked the large black numbers in their slots, threatening to measure my minutes. For me, they had some dippy association with my mother playing bingo in a noisy tent or solitairing out the cards. Later, flight numbers would have the same effect. Anyway, the singing seemed particularly humiliating. I hated hearing my father’s voice enlarge itself as we sang on, or my mother’s fall away suddenly, as if pushed off a cliff. And I hated handing forward the collection. My father would always put a little manila envelope on the plate. It bore on its face a palely printed picture of Jesus. I felt as though we were being blackmailed. If he didn’t pay, the preacher would point his finger at my father and say: you made your wife weep again; you were cross with your little boy; you cursed cars and other drivers all last week; you have hid the gin; you are in no one’s real employ. O stand and sing, Jerry bade us. O now sing sitting down. O next respond, when 1 read, with readings. O then approve my well-chosen text; admire the clever twists of my interpretation of it; be amused by my harmless jokes, and O by my cute, judicious, and instructive anecdotes. Yes. I remember he did have a clear, direct delivery which allowed us to follow along like lambs. Young, handsome, wholesome, Jerry was like a milkshake moving creamily through its straw. He turned each point so gently against himself everyone felt full, sweet-mouthed, and kind. I was impressed by the hush he held us in. A Princeton Presbyterian, my father said with admiration. His announcements were crisp; we did not sing more than one chorus, despite the enormous number of verses the hymns had; his benedictions were far-flung though brief; soon everyone was on their feet; the recessional was a relief; in our fancy ensembles and familiar Sunday suits, we were filing out, on our way;
and then, as though we were surrendering a ticket stub, Jerry took our greetings at the entrance as we left.
   Whatsizname didn’t stay with us long. His skills were too fine for our coarse and paltry town, and the Lord called him to a pulpit in Pittsburgh. The little interest my parents took in the church flickered faintly for a few months after that, and then went quietly out. Whether virtues are finally of two kinds, and whether vice is the practice of a passive virtue in a time and situation which calls for action, or v. versa, is really irrelevant. What is important is that Jerry—what was he called?—gave me my first demonstration of the power of the word. Didn’t Emerson develop his sense of things in the same way? So did many politicians, writers, scholars, in the rural South. Adolf Hitler had a similar experience—only it was in that movie about a political agitator he saw in Vienna, the one made from a Kellermann novel. Der Tunnel, it was titled. Yes. At least I’ve got that right. Though K. may be spelled with one n. I’m not sure.
   Starlings. Lost utterly to history. Amelita Galli-Curci. Ah, my dear, my dear. You were so thrillhilly, so sweet, so clear. The stars seem to be rubbing their banana-colored beaks against the sheltering branches. And the sparrows, of course, constantly quarrel and complain. The world will be theirs one day, though no one will record it. There’s also the occasional clink of soda bottles shivering in the door of the fridge, a distant shoefall or creak from a stair. I am able to classify the tick of a twig against a window, the pop of a cold wall where it butts the chimney, and that delicate tink which marks the recoil of a lamp chain from its pull. Now I hear a jay cawing like a crow. No Grote. No Macaulay. Macaulay is class-sick, Planmantee shouts, punching Culp on the arm. The angry chitter of the squirrels has altered into something strident and unpleasantly mechanical, while I sit in my own weak Pepys as in my own smear—my wet like one incontinent—and fuss.
   My will—it falters—and my pen escapes the track it lays to dildo on the margins. A role, I was about to write . . . Sincerity, I was about to say . . . Yet Hitler—the dissembler, the liar, the hypocrite, the mountebank, the deluder, the con man, the sophist, the manipulator, the dreamer, the stage manager, and the ultimate ham—he was probably history's single most sincere man.
   Even alone, marooned in this room without a sample day of the week—say, a Monday or a Friday—-to serve me, the vitam impendere vero is not for me, any more than it really was for Gide, who was perhaps dazzled by the bad example of Rousseau, that professional fess-upper, whom I should less readily believe than Casanova, to whom Truth was the ardent center of a tossed skirt.
  A role, 1 was about to write . . . Lousy morning, lamentable afternoon, and now a demeaning evening, a humiliating play. Of words. So rig a role, hey . . . gimme, gimme . . . rigamarole, say ... a part... oh yes, a rite, a ritual . . . gimme mine ... I hear the leerer’s jeer at the sight of my fallen pants. O I hear History—Yours and (Mine. 1 hear the universal tn^inDta^. It is a singalong led by 1M0®8§ IfsODglM <£ fflhi® Stomal! Spfa®ir®®.
       0040
IN CONCERT
                                 I once went to bed with a nun whose budding had barely begun.
                                     She was tender and small;
                                    I was thick, strong, and tall;
                             Yet her blossoms bloomed two for my one.
   Can I employ my safely seated life to sled some scary slope, some soapy thigh? And the sway of uncut grass: can I make use of it? the hardened nipple, smoke slowly climbing up a light, the sky receding like an illustration in a physics book, Lou’s vaginal caress . . . all, one way or other, part of a universe expanding into emptiness. A part. I populate my brain each day with further figures, larger numbers, longer lists, yet the space between everything increases. Fifty into . . . One. One. Yes, One’s amusing, it’s so little and lonely above the bar: 1. Then I . . . how huge a word in that small English mark, the shape of a Grecian pillar. Even now I am the crowd, the hall, the lecture and the lecturer. I am his snotty hankie, dusty coat cloth, brittle bones and bony body. And I laugh. 1 shake.
                                  ... dies* Tiefen, dlese Wiesen und dlese Wasser waren sein Gesicht.
Ah, Mad Meg shook, for Meg was mad. He shook until he died. He shook his length, entire; inside he shook: his veins whined like wires in a wind, and his bones scraped. Until he died. Wildly shaking, wildly singing. A fire out of fuel, flue, and fireplace. Till he died.
   I followed his coffin to its grave.
   Life in a schoolroom. Life in a chair. Endless journey. I’ve read many novels about tired clerks, their fingers erasing their eyes as they worked, perched on high stools, too, like stumped owls, elastic bloomering the sleeves of their shirts—so have you—while banded to their foreheads like the frown from their squints, there were eyeshades to dampen the dry light a little. I’ve been the doctor in his buggy (they always showed snow in the old prints, runnered roads, cheerful death), and so I’ve known the company of scuffed black bags and shiny basins, gray worried faces, dark cold middles of the night. Cups of steaming tea follow both the baby and the amputation. I’ve been with the miner at the coal face, just as you have, dust gathering in every line of him till he’s gray as a rubbing. I’ve put on the pale face of the prisoner—easy, too—worn as his walls, always, isn’t he? his fingers running like water over the stones, searching for cracks, for something. He's at once listless and frantic. So don’t talk to me of miners, Martha, sandhogs worming under rivers, of sewers or the shut-up prince, of occupations of special hazard and remuneration; don’t hand me sentimental upchuck of that kind, the sacrifice of doctors, the beatings pugilists receive, or the personal pounding politicians get; not when I’ve lived my life at a desk, here or there among nailed-down chairs; don’t piss along my leg or shit in my pants—that’s what such appeals are—for I have black lung, too, a bent nose, a tarnished reputation, an abandoned wife (that’s you, my dear); and I have spent so much of my time in the study, settled as a lesson plan, level as this desktop, still as my mind was, quiet as the whisper of the clock, that I’ve passed whole days on my ass in the posture of the constipated or the guru; weeks, months, seasons, semesters, years, sluggish as a python; and consequently led—just like the books I’ve written, read, and taught—a small, square, solid, six-buck, clothbound, print and paper-jacket life.
   In a few months I shall enter my third sabbatical, the first I’ve spent outside Germany, and Martha thinks we should ship somewhere civil like Greece, but I say what is civil about Greece, what is civil about the sea, what is civil? Perhaps she will go off to dig up ancestors, fetch up a few quarterings like old bones from a bog. Peace to me, I say. I deserve a little of the snore of God. I deserve the pillow and the slow fern fan. After twenty-one years of talk, of tests, of "please be clear and don't repeat”; after twenty-one years of blue pencils, sly and friendly faces, cute excuses, scratchy chalk; after Susu, Lou and Rue, and every sweater-swollen coed who set her thighs to singing so a smile would grace her grade; oh, I need my letup, I need my release; after such a restless life—awake to hear the morning paper reach the lawn as though 1 were
guarding the grass, awake so the first alert birds may howdeedo a hallelujah before they breakfast on worms and fruit—I need my comatostie drowse, my swaddle, Seventh Heaven, Sunday, my barbiturates, my sleep.
   Dawn slips under the low black clouds like a body under bedclothes. I let the storm slam when 1 leave the house. All clear, Martha, all clear. The garden goes by me quietly, a cemetery now, and the orchard parts like the Red Sea. Our garage is dark and empty. Lou loved me. 1 read Rilke. Swam. Strolled the lead cliffs. Apples like worn hearts litter the ground and the crisp air makes my skin pimple. That’s it: the kids are gone. The cold has crystallized the rain so its puddles break beneath my heavy boots, and my stride eats up space like a jaw. I remember my youth, when I was pleased with my body. Today—it’s odd—the thought does not disturb me. 1 can feel my bones move, and my spirits are lifting with the light. 1 am happy to be alone in this good world, and I leap the muddy drainage ditch with ease—not always so—and proceed into the open woods as if I lived there and had nothing to walk quickly for, nothing to fear.
   Actually . . . Actually I speak. I doze. I stammer. 1 correct. I shout. I bow. And I applaud. In the cave of the winds. The right side writes, the left listens. To the sound of the scribble. A fraction thinks, a fraction weeps, a fraction spits ... not right. A fraction jibes, a fraction measures, a fraction rhymes, a part romances, a part connives, one part’s as sweetly reasonable as pie. A sliver loves, another cheats, a quarter flies; one shits with a twenty-eighth ... not right, not right at all. I piss with my penis. I chew with my teeth, only my eyes see, it’s my nose which breathes, and my hair is an outdated hat. Is that the way I am divided . . . into faculties? No one should be a university. Not that stiff-eyed multitude, that fractured plurality of egos: IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII . . . they are a decorative fence, a Jewish exclamation, a nest of hurdles, warning siren, engine puffing, iron track, clever mechanical birdie, zipper’s straddle . . . husband scholar good sport papa lover ... I don’t know. I’m over fifty . . . over... In a certain sense, unsentimentally, my life is over. You age. One does. One thinks, one weeps . . . God. I don’t know. I take close notes. You age, you lose your faculties, become a faculty. If you are lucky you become a mind, abstract as history.
   Well, I’d be flenched of my office friends if 1 could choose. Let’s draw up a true Bill, they say, circling me, pointing their pens. O he’s true blue, is Bill: he likes inditements. Then each mouth squats. They leave their puns in piles: sniff, salute, and go. My colleagues. Their way I’d be flenched of me.
   Since the shit my bowels have moved through for more than fifty years has been flushed daily and forgotten, why not the rest: Mad Meg, mother, father, Marty, me, the dirty Jews, the dirtier Nazis, Susu, Lou, Culp, Planman-
tee . . . ? I have tried hard not to bear malice. Haven’t I? Every day, like lifting weights, haven’t I worked out, weakening myself, becoming a fish-and-lily Christian in all but belief, and unable to bear false witness or a grudge, to carry on a feud or hurl an insult, with mercy's milk, like water, running through my veins? Haven’t 1 labored loyally to be unable ... to be limp and languishing? to forgive, forget, let live, and so forth? ooooooooooh not to bear malice for all I’ve been through, for all I’ve done to others, for every moment of my life I’ve not enjoyed—ooooooooooh yet 1 do. When is the rage I contain going to find its utterance? Ini®'®?. Are these sheets to be my MEIN KAMPF? Inlaw (a)®'®?, indeed. Bear malice! The malice I bear has borne me to my knees. I have resentment to spare for a flood; my loose change would millionaire most men.
   Now, in fact, 1 molest myself, don't 1? Ah! I stand in my own way. I step on my own toes. I threaten, and it’s I who mugs me. I grip my throat, don't I? 1 crush my chest. Like a cobra, 1 spit in my own eyes. Hate has given force and purpose to my life. I’ve studied it. It’s studied me. Love, when I’ve allowed it— no, no, no—when it’s been permitted me, has nearly destroyed it . . . with visions, like a slut, of what might be. I'm just an infant’s prick it has
                   The flag my kids designed and carried around the block before I burned it and their bottoms. The secret of the swastika, they said, though they didn’t know the meaning of the number sixty-nine.
amused itself by teaching wobbly standups. As long as you sold knickknacks you would suckle me, Lou, my daughter of the Live & Dime; but as a student, hoity-toity, you fucked like a lady; you were active as the bedclothes, sensuous as Vaseline; ah, what blindness had I inflicted on myself not to see your future treachery? Where the willow loops, the sky is still lazy. I dream of your body, blue as a star. With that light in me, I think foolishly, I'd be a heaven, and close in my arms whole towns while sleeping. My heart leaps as uselessly as these sentiments do, and though there’s a war in me, nothing remains to be seen, everything has been decided, including the arrival of my death, for my future’s simply what, tomorrow, 1 shall think about my past.
   Will there be novelty? No. My great wife avalanching me. When she smiles she shows a pale gray upper gum like chewed pork. Grinning, she rolls off her panties. What a crowd of hair has gathered under! Is something happening in the crease? there’s been an accident? where are police? Her nipples rise from broadly wrinkled paddies. Aroused, the wrinkles stiffen, harden to a tree’s bark.
Those nipples were so pink once, now they’re grimy. Smudged cloth-covered buttons, they button down her belly. I don’t want to be what I am: old clothes hangered in a closet.
  The sun on such a brilliant day is blinding. Planmantee in his vest and great graycoat smiles with condescension. I'm to be twitted. Why must he dress like a dandy? He summers in Paris; shops for snobberies along the quais; would wear a straw boater a la Maurice Chevalier, if he dared. I should like a chat about that dissertation, he says. I've been summoned to his office like a servant. His graycoat is hung upon a hanger like a cloud around a mountain. How did he—that—fellow—how did he hit upon his topic? did you approve it? The sun has covered the floor with a rug of the same stupid snow as the earth. You mean Larry? Lacelli? I’ve been supervising his thesis for—ummm, two—two years as of yesterday noon during the third dong. Plan nods his head, though nothing else of him agrees to go along. I take it, then, that
                                                                   Would I do that—
put two years in—if I didn’t approve of the subject? Oh, of course, I assumed you had yessed it, he says, that I had assumed, but because of your okay, Bill, 1 find myself with a little puzzle that ... He smiles like a thin slice of meat. I shook the puzzle just a little, and that shaking shook my assumption, he says. Planmantee settles his long frame into his chair. I stand. The window. Soon my eyes will buzz. O my, how he enjoys masturbating his turgid morality! He looks at me with what I take to be intensity. Only his thick glasses would fit his brain. Otiosities—they can’t be seen through. Whew. A pompous positivist. Can either be endured? When a positivist says he’s been presented with a “little puzzle," he means you’ve crapped a load of concepts into the upturned bowl of his thinking cap. 1 thought it was the one subject Lacelli knew well, I say. (I am apologizing, and I hate it.) Otherwise he’d never finish. Eyebrows rise above the opaque gray rounds of his empiricism. This signifies a surprise which is nevertheless wholly expected. Need Lacelli finish? Can’t we finish Lacelli? Plan lacquers his eeee’s. You could set a drink down and not ring them. Must every student, of whatever dense or porous quality, complete our program? We have carried this kid for years, Plan. (I appeal to him. I hate it.) Don’t you remember those meetings of the candidates’ committee? If you do, you will remember that I protested Lacelli’s admission. 1 voted against him again at the end of the first year. 1 was the only dissenter. I was accused of head-hunting. Now no one will work with the schmuck. What the hell’s he to work on? Who the hell’s he to work with? Well, Planmantee says, I’m only an outside examiner, of course, in this case ... He uses the expression “I’m only” as if he were Socrates. The Wisest Man in Greece. His large wrists emerge from a herringbone sleeve. He is about to compose a gesture. Of hard-won complacency.
Those etchy praying hands. But—he sighs invisibly, like a leaking tire: D’Annunzio? A mere touch of the tips, then the palms fall faceup. ... so narrow, so silly, so thin . . . No, 1 say. Not D’Annunzio. Italian fascism is his subject. Plan has large, heavy, workman’s hands he’s washed, made soft, manicured. He peers at me through a tube shaped by one of them. Through so small an asshole, he says with some passion, how much history does Lacelli expect to see? Silver chain across his chest carries his PBK key. He also belongs to Mensa. One wide gold band boasts of his husbanding. . . . not only is the topic unhistorical, basically absurd as conceived, but the treatment . . . Just because D’Annunzio is— . . . fascism and the ottava rima, for christ’s sake . . . That’s not fair, that’s a complete distortion, a cartoon you’ve—
   . . . the treatment, the treatment . . .
  Composition.
  The mountebank is professional. That’s the difference. He plays a part but never comes to pieces; he’s whole in every suit, entire in each attire he chooses. Hilarity forces its fool way out of me, forces its life. I am embarrassed (it’s like pulling down my pants before a stranger), if I’m serious with myself. Take note. Position. Another defensive noise, a whistlpjjpr the graveyard. Stones to mark the selves that are     NoMHfekite. S||fether,i)|gH|tghosts in every grave
(except the ones th^Bewans»g,Mpettc^bnde|ppi|^ which snuffed out even spirits), and on|pi||^uda||^^ateiM|e, cqpgpSe on the side of the sky like moisture on a glass . . . and there I am, dead all these years, a little boy in knickers, flat sailor hat and scarfy tie, whiny nose and easy bladder—what a weapon that bladder was! how brilliantly I geed in every place—yes, that’s one ghost, and it may w£TJ3T£;Tet, at fifty, as I.JM$. amon&jny selves . . . and thus he peed, the brat, ir|Kvmt clwcl||the Mfe         the Palmer House,
carefully apart from j||jrr{£jpre sj£ ut$s, sj&erecfimrib or lazy bellhops in their servant’s suits, spitmons anoSiike tl^fisen efflsof logs on the lobby floor, far from the little leashed dogs of the dogged guests, so there’d be no mistake (credit where credit, he already thought), hosing from a trouser a protesting lake, no thumb allowed to dutchboy upMe dike and win renown, but with both wrapped inside.|^^gers^:^ugBiilpj8y we^ef^fe puissant instrument itself, he turned the j£p,’ fogingKjrjpth ap.<| volUppylP the liquid. Thus he spoke his piece in elJSStcHl reslllfcpK, anlS qftice^^iithe front seats of autos stalled at crossings, in trains negotiating trestles, at teas, at bridge, at ladies’ luncheons (every showing-off, he showered), on Ferris wheels or chute-the-chutes, at fairs while hurling balls toward bottles, watching Tom Mix make his six-gun smoke or listening to the Shadow. In schoolrooms he would leak recit-
ing Latin, while at the grocery he always put a puddle by the pickle barrel. Again when playing catch or house or doctor, he’d release at a critical moment. In playgrounds he washed down the slides. Oh, then, too, from cats he learned the trick of standing liquidly in sandboxes, and very often, finally, from bravado, anytime, in fun, when dared, for bets, he pissed along his leg. But my god 1 never wet my bed. No, 1 was not incontinent in that fashion, for this was fully purposed protest pissing, the sort Jesus should have used in self-defense (the Jews could have, the Dukhobors, Mahatma Gandhi); in fact, that’s how I read the gushing-waters incident, when the spear is supposed to have entered His side.
   I should begin anew because my mind careens.
   Mountebank: does he wear a waiter’s dress suit one year, SS uniform another?
   When I divide I get no thinner. It does not help me to get out.
   Time slides by, thick as a dirty river. So am 1 . . . bridge and both banks— people crossing—crates in the brown stream passing under. . .
   Lou. Lou. What do I remember? do I remember my protesting? Do I see the self 1 had? see Tabor now? the boots throw up their image? What do 1 remember—honestly. No, that won’t do—not right. I’m such an easy fool? Dreams grip me. Wait—not right. What do dreams do? do dreams grip? . . . grip? . . . grip who? I had a figure in a dream, the dream gripped, I remember. On my page the light is drying. The letters themselves seem to fade. My own marks move inside themselves, away from me. I look up and find the window’s gray. Well, there’s always the bright electric. Toward whose shore slides an ocean of cloud? And l remember only what I dare to . . . titles on the dimming spines of books. What really remains to me? a hand on my desk, dark and loose as a glove? these reveries? O dreams wind, envelop, wrap up, compass, cloud, close down upon, blot out, fog in. Don’t they? they and their illusions? I’m not certain. Tabor does not disappear: there’s the glisten of my wedding ring, the pale face of the paper. . . Suppose I were signing warrants? would that be any more real? Lists, names, numbers . . . numbers for the futureless . . . fragments, ^jtles, William Frederick Kohler                                     —-
wounds. And are these objects any more than sensory consignments, shipments William F. Kohler of shop goods?
     W. F. Kohler
W. F. K. oKk
Bill Kohler Billy Boy Willi K.
The truck was making for an open ditch; the doors were opened, and the corpses were thrown out, just as though they were alive, so smooth were their limbs.
... so smooth were their limbs . . . like marble, I suppose—they always are. I
     Kay
had a figure in a dream, the dream gripped, I remember.
     Wilfred Koh
     Whiff Cough                They were hurled into the ditch, and I
     Whiffy                  can still see a civilian extracting teeth
     Willko                    with tooth pliers. And then I was away—
     Herr Rickler
And by inventing pliers, prevent speech. Excellent. Excel— No. Wait. Wait.
     413-012
     287-30-5088                 I jumped into my car and did not open
     896-7707 Ext. 3311          my mouth again.
     3708 015575 21009                    *
No. 1 don’t know. O shit shit shit I’m not certain. No heart should hold its blood like a cup.
   They lay first in the air where their dying seemed to make a skin of them, and then in the earth where only a vagrant odor, passing through one’s nostrils like a shiver, served to say they were breathing; and as these dead decayed like seeds sown in a drill, they grew to resemble their grandfathers—marvelously framed and similarly pale—and then their forebears at an even greater and more simian remove and reach of time, till finally they became as naked and innocent as Adam, thin as a thought, smooth and incorruptible at last, as it was written originally in their own book. We lie with the Fates from our first conception; for it is said—and truly too—that the flesh is built up over the bones at birth by the caresses of those star-guarding harlots whose pawed passage clings there like a cloth, just as the soul in our life is the silted delta of the senses, their accumulated fat; and it is Clotho whose touch becomes our tissue, and Atropos who trims it to the shape we'll take, and Lachesis who then stitches it about us like a shroud; so when we go to ground, as eventually we must, we lose our lusts with our linens, arising on the last day as clean and shriven as the one on which we were begot. Consequently the Boche took out the teeth because they were the bones that bite, that inform, that dream; and which bone, indeed, do we dream with if not the dream-bone? yes, the bone which Moses blew to dream the Lord. No gold-filled molar has a majesty to match it. Dice made of dream-bones rattle in the dice box; throw down a pair of tyrants shaped as double dots; cast Christ’s lot; toss out a series of sevens or those boxcars Jews were packed in. And 1 remember that soldier’s hand sticking out of my shellslide like a shrub. There was a pale ring where his ring had been, and his cold blue nails were chewed. The earth slid slowly over us, I remember, and I survived because my nose was shoved in a coffee can, like Pooh's in his honey pot, by the stealthy
mud; consequently [ could use that lucky tin lung to huff and puff in while I kicked, flailed, and flopped sufficiently to unboat and unbury myself. By the time the rain had sluiced me clean, and I had huddled in an open space, regardless of rifles, gasping as though I were still in the whale, and feeling grateful for a sky 1 couldn’t see, the other soldier had been covered many hours, hours before I took hold of his stiff exclaiming fingers and saw he’d been already robbed. Such was the substance and the symbol of that adventure, and I realize now that sums are what I most remember—upshots—if I remember shot                                  shot                 shot
anything—the quality of additions—what anything amounts to. History is just
                                                           shot
such a sum: the upshots of upshots. For what is not a sum is not in history, shot                                   shot                shot
although these stealthy totals hide behind their columns like that missing ring, shot                                   shot                shot
or milk around the mouth, the semen that bears the blame, shot shot                                   shot                shot
   All right, then, let s off-load these stealthy Jews from their trains.
                         shot         shot                 shot
Line this data up for death: my research. The veining of the marble, 1 remember shot                                   shot                shot
that, and the lines of gold which edged the scrolling capitals above the shot                                  shot                 shot
columns, I remember those (everything official in Germany was Greek), shot                                  shot                 shot
                                                                  and the heaviness of the hang-hang-
                         shot         shot                 shot        hang
ings, the gold tassels on the pulls, the glistening boots, I remember them— and                      shot         shot                 shot        hang
the slowly drifting schools of people . . . not a single historical thing. Wait. One.                     shot         shot                 shot        hang
That everything official in Germany was Greek. A perfect sum. Yet as rudely shot                                  shot                 shot        hang
belched up as something spoken by the belly through the borrowed services of a shot                                  shot                 shot        hang
gastriloquist. Still, an honest en effet. The color of the drapes was plum.
I’dgas                   shot         shot                 shot        hang
like to look below my eyes and see not language staring back at me, not gas shot                                  shot                 shot        hang
sentences or single words or awkward pen lines, but a surface clear and gas shot                               shot               shot       hang
burnished as a glass. There my figure would appear as perfectly as any Form gas                   shot         shot               shot       hang
reflected in Platonic space—as those tall soot-black boots which 1 remembergas           shot         shot               shot       hang
grew inside the marble. I am so old, so far away, so thin in my fatty amplitude,gas         shot         shot               shot       hang
1 must starve the image in order to fit it in me. The boots gleamed; they always gleamed; and that
Bas                   shot         shot               shot       hang
gleam lay back within the image of the boots like fish asleep in shaded water-gas             shot         shot               shot       hang
Oh, god help me—what a liar!
   Where, after all, is Germany?
   Should I begin when I was born as history would have me—a child of time— to come between two ticks into the world with only tocks to follow? Yet 1 did not begin when I was born, but later; then just once, in love, 1 was where nothing was before, or after.
          KOH WHISTLES UP A WIND
                                                              In the old days, before beginning and in order to continue, they always asked for celestial safe; guide my faltering steps;
aid; bless these boats and make them strengthen my arm and sharpen my sword; preserve my penis from the pox, O Lord. Like pants from a weakened waistband, there has been a certain sliding down of expectation. Homer wanted the whole of Ulysses’ wanderings whistled through his lips—vain, greedy man—the way, according to his friends, the soul of, perhaps it was Pythagoras, might be heard lamenting in the howls of a hound. «JWell, the |I[my|me|, the total absorption of the blind,
is well known. They expect the world to move aside and not bump. <|Did he sing without pencils—this jongleur, Homer? And where was the cup? ^They’ve had a hard knock, so now they want a soft touch. All that pity in place of milk has switched their skin and bones. What do you deserve, though, but darkness, if you’ve failed to pay the electric? «JHe had the stare of a statue without the excuse of stone—this raconteur, this Homer. *|Oedipus didn’t keen, who put his own out the way some gouge holes to plant bulbs.
What light do they shine, down there in the dirt? down there in the dirt? downstairs? «[My stars, these poets are so petty despite the high opinion they have of themselves. Virgil—a yokel, tubercular it’s said, dark, tall, raw, didn’t he moisten his quill with lung-pink spit? yeah, well, he merely wanted help with fakes and fibs . . . excuses for his hero’s dismal dillydally, the unremitting malice of the gods. Hatred is a habit of the heavens, hadn’t he heard? whirlwind and hail and parching drought, drenching rain and the blinding white pelt of the blizzard, the shout that scars trees, fog like the film from my own feelings settling slowly over everything, chilling, dampening, obscuring the world with silence, releasing it from every relation, setting it adrift . . . He should have come to me. I know all about regretfullys. I hold the IrOOgjlhl COMMIT @1? [3fe= ®Mliin)®ir§. 1 receive excuses the way silos are funneled grain.
   dear Pro£
   My grandinomma died so I'll be unable, Friday, 3 I think we had arranged (1 cough 2 knocks), to squeeze your penis in my lotioned palm. Tough tibby, o my weakly weenied cheri.
   Dear Dad,
   I didn’t get in on time last night because Anna K Sc Sister C Sc me Sc Madame B ran out of road rounding a curve and had to walk home through five miles of concatenating cloud, frequent patches of millinery damp and Disney trees.
   Hi there, husz -
   I regret very much any inconvenience or dismay my oral reluctance may have caused you, but I was poisoned once by a spew of sperm from a sick imagination and had to spend a fortnight with some local dentifrice. It gags me to think about, though it was winters ago when I was only the spring of a summer girl.
   I’m sure a sweet shit like you will understand.
   Hey K
   —got lost in my graygreen grassblue overcoat with the Austrian stitching and the military collar and consequently didn't quite make the meeting . . . feel in my sleeve, the grease where I slid is still slick as a slide for otters.
   Bill, after turning and tossing it over I’ve decided not to honor your father and mother any longer or remember a thing you’ve said or be obedient to your command or respect a single belief you’ve been blind enough to believe or wave your
flag or share in any sense the same feeling you might have felt or think- a thought you might have thought without first wiping off the seat because even when I touch you it will be to touch myself the slow circular way a bear rubs its back and behind against a tree to scratch its back and behind and not the tree, and no, my fur’s not for you, baby, I’m keeping it flattened in the fat of my thighs like a leaf in a Holy Book, bet your boots, so that’s my answer when there’s been no question and that will be the reason why I am continuing to employ and otherwise keep oiled and up to snuff—in shorten service, all those habits you intolerate and would have had me fire even though they’ve been with me as long as my boobs and like with Rastus my relations with them have always been all right and responsible and floppy-hatted, gentlewomanly, and say, they have families, habits have, you realize that? relations like uncles, alcoholic and hateful, who screw nieces with the same passion they’d use to piss in a bottle, always brown and ancient with old booze, that’s what you bring to my bed, come to think, an old brown bottle-nozzle, well, I tell you, instead let’s pretend we’re two new copper-colored pennies thrown on the world at random by the US Mint and let’s have just about that much to do with one another now or in a future which is to be fuckless between us as furniture.
   OK, Koh? OK?
   Dear Professor Kohler:
   I was unable to continue or complete ... I have many monetary problems ... a bleeding bride . .. horns on my head and corns on my feet. . . and besides I was made wretchedly ill recently by raw data . . . disingested tabulars and shat words . .. The Dean has my doctor’s diagram and dossier if you’d like to see it.
   0 you must believe me, Kohlee, I was coming, coming, coming, when I was caught in a column of kiddie cars . . . and kept . . . and kept . . . the kids, the cars . . . and couldn't . . . couldn’t . . .
                 The fallen sky oppressed me quite,
                 I could not get to sleep last night.
   The muses of excuses? I am the National Repository. And I take in no more than I pay out. A securely failing institution, books so finely balanced there’s never been a profit. Fa9ade of granite and custard. 1 should call upon Mme. de Girardin, perhaps, La Muse de la patrie, or a lesser but likelier sort, La Muse Limoniere, what was her name? Charlotte . . . Bourette. Weil, there’s nothing my firm doesn’t know about weaseling. Procrastination a specialty. President
by my own acclamation, I’ve made a profession of putting off payoff. Why diddle Dido when you can found Rome—is that the question? What dumb dong could not contrive a dozen reasons? I've run out of ones for nonfucking the wife, though. It’s been a slow, that is to say, a flaccid season. Lust no longer a loss leader. The same stock stands on the same shelves, nightie after nightie, as I make a joke of it, this life without tumescence, my wife’s response beneath a layer of talc. I’m overculpensating; that’s my problem. But if she would suck at something other than a soda straw. If I could get one pant when I took off my trousers. If she would slide her tongue’s tip lightly along the long bone of my back as Lou once did. If once. Once. Ai! that fat bitch . . . that wet basement, barnyard, Yankee slit, French trench . . . that German ditch ... if, once . . . she lit that faithless cosmopolitan clit . . . but once. Ai! Ai! That ham’s hock. Length of light like a pencil in the passage. Down there in the dirt. Down there. That ox’s muzzle. That cattle’s chest. Ai58 ^08 A08 There’s a Homeric yawp; but what’s the use of howling? who will hear and what will change? Marty remains, and Marty’s large, hard, hidden tummy, pale as a vampire’s victim, once belonged to a turtle—that's my claim—and the shell’s not even charitable in soup. Believe me, she carries a cow's cunt below those fatty stairs of hers like someone boarding a bus with a bursting bag . . . her shy lower lips like a rooster’s wattle. I should crow in that?
   Then Milton, also suffering from batteries gone shineless against the guarantee, had to ask twice like a kid for his candy. ^Nonetheless, those ancient bards, they had their Heavens and the ear of some Almighty, a palm, you might say, to put a petition in; but poor Rilke, remember? could only wonder who would hearken if he did cry, Help me! to the angels.
                               O goddess of the risen gorge . . .
   Everywhere nothing now but a revocation of the muse. Cancel Clio, cross out sweet Calliope, for history’s been buggered by ideology, and farts its facts in an odorous cloud, while poets have no breath whatever, are in another business presently, where Parnassus is a pastry, and produce their poems promptly on request like short-order cooks shake forth a batch of fries. Mark out Melpomene. The lines of the anonymous are nothing like the lives of the saints; a celebrity is but a draft from his fans; crooks establish dynasties on stolen dimes, and slips of policy feed greasy Sicilian Caesars who are all, one hopes, predamned the way our postage is prepaid; then politicians, nowadays, are as unlikely subjects for tragedy as dung dropped from the bronze horses of their predecessors; while the otherwise so-called great have all the substance of a cunt-encouraged cheer from the stands. Of Thalia make a laughingstock. Erase Erato as well, since sex is Smut (a kind of commercial cleanser); Euterpe too, because the flute which gladdens is a kid’s kazoo, and comedy a laughingstock. Tear Terpsichore in two like a losing
ticket. We do not dance these days, we march. We stomp. As for Polyhymnia . . . where everything’s a sewer, what is sacred? soccer? and the heavens, like Urania herself, were buried long ago beneath the battlefield where we did in the planets and drove the constellations like fattened cattle to the abattoirs.
   Shall 1 call up the crafts of conservation: lemon and brandy, honey and sunshine, salt and wine, the lava and ice which slew and saved the sabertooth; marooned Pompeii’s indulgent daily life on an isle out of time? Should I muster all the ancient arts of preservation: disembowelment, embalmment, mummification? the dry stone tomb, Etna’s immortalizing crater? Can my crabby complaints, my discontents, be stored like grain against that unlikely lean year when there is a famine in misfortune? Can my curses be kept calm in a cool cellar; my harvest of sour grapes tunned like a vintage; and can all my cruelty of mind come powdered in a package like dried milk or Jell-O? During the Depression, when my family bought canned fruits and vegetables by the case in order to save, it was my job to arrange our hoard on shelves in the basement. But is there anything in life now I wish to Leninize, so mobs may march by and be edified; anything I would like to bottle and lay down for the next decade to enjoy? Have I some favorite fish to barrel, smoke, bury in brine, release in an ocean of oil?
   Flounce from your stew, you sluttish muse, and bring me a pleasant subject.
   It is true, too, that fragments from the great artistes come high: a tone of voice, a flash of tinsel, the place a graceful shadow fell, a cough, a vibrant stride. Relics are also dear, though there’s still no absence of supply: towers which have been shrunk to the size of infant Eiffels, rolled out upon postcards, blown in hankies. With one of those I’ve wiped off all my tears. Yes, fragments from the great artistes come high, but 1 know where to buy my first kiss—yours as well as mine now—in the liplike shape of an ashtray, or find a tantrum tie-dyed as a scarf, or a youthful ideal to put up as a pennant.
   O sing O muse—cognate with mind and all the acts pertaining
                 (though in truth you muzzle too, you mock, you jest and tease, you cause us to gape and loiter, to lose every decent sense of time, to stray from the normal gnaw and chew of everyday, from the honest toil, the peaceful sleep, the customary healthy shit and needful screw of ordinary life, to slip into the silent empire of Elea: full, round, reasonable, yet for all that, quite insane)—
   O brood O muse upon my mighty subject like a holy hen upon the nest of night (that endless dungeon of air which held pure extinction prisoner till the word released it by striking the first light, and on that order, out of Nothing, nothing came);
   O ponder the fascism of the heart
                 (that “glorious phrase’’);
   Sing of disappointments more repeated than the batter of the sea, of lives embittered by resentments so ubiquitous the ocean's salt seems thinly shaken, of letdowns local as the sofa where 1 copped my freshman’s feel, of failures as frequent as first love, first nights, last stands; do not warble of arms or adventurous deeds or shepherds playing on their private fifes, or of civil war or monarchies at swords; consider rather the slightly squinkered clerk, the soul which has become as shabby and soiled in its seat as worn-out underwear, a life lit like a lonely room and run like a laddered stocking.
   Behold the sagging tit, the drudge-gray mopped-out cunt-corked wife, stale as yesterday’s soapy water, or study the shiftless kid, seedy before any bloom, thin and mean as a weed in a walk;
   smell the grease that stands rancid in the pan like a second skin, the pan aslant on some fuel-farting stove, the stove in its corner contributing what it can to the brutal conviviality of close quarters;
   let depression like time-payments weigh you down; feel desperation and despair like dust thick in the rug and the ragged curtains, or carry puppy pee and plate-scrapings, wrapped in the colored pages of the Sunday paper, out to the loose and blowing, dog-jawed heap in the alley;
   spend your money on large cars, loud clothes, sofa-sized paintings, excursions to Hawaii, trinkets, knickknacks, fast food, golf clubs, call girls, slimming salons, booze;
   suffer shouting, heat rash, chilblains, beatings, betrayal, guilt, impotence, jail, jealousy, humiliation, VD, vermin, stink.
   Sweat through a St. Louis summer and sing of that.
   O muse, I cry, as loudly as 1 can, while still commanding a constricted scribble, hear me! help me! but my nasty echo answers: one muse for all the caterwauling you have called for! where none was in that lowlife line of work before?
   It’s true. I’ll need all nine for what I want to do—all nine whom Hesiod must have frigged to get his way, for he first spoke their secret names and hauled their history by the snout into his poem. For what I want to do . . .
   Which is what—exactly? to deregulate Descartes like all the rest of the romancers? to philosophize while performing some middle-age adultery, basically enjoying your anxieties like raw likker when it’s gotten to the belly? I know—you want to make the dull amazing; you want to Heidegger some wholesome thought, darken daytime for the TV, grind the world into a grain of Blake.
   O, I deny it! On the contrary! I shall not abuse your gift. I pledge to you, if you should choose me, not to make a mere magician’s more of less. I have no wish to wine water or hand out loaves and fishes like tickets on a turkey. Misfits, creeps, outcasts of every class: these are my constituents—the disappointed people—and if I could make them close ranks like a fist, strike as hard as any knuckle.
   Hey Kohler—hey Koh—whistle up a wind. Alone, have 1 the mouth for it? the sort of wind I want? Imagine me, bold Kohler, calling out for help—and to conclude, not to commence—to end, to halt, to -30-, stop, leave off, to hush forever... to untick tock.
   Imagine. Here, on this desktop, just beneath my nervous fingers and my trembling eyes, imagine—done into witty decals—lie all my lies, almost as many as the postage in an album which arranges by face value, color, and year the entire collection. No diaries for me, no leather-covered couch. No. I’ll dismiss the past as brusquely as a dishonest servant. I’ve small need for recollections. I have Bartlett’s Quotations. Do 1 consult that? Like a wonderful physician, will it prescribe for me? so many drops of Proust, a tincture of Old Testament, daily dose of Freud, and I shall peel off my past like a sticker warning FlftJiMlOyS. I have Roget’s Thesaurus. 1 have Skeat. 1 have a wall of histories, cartons of bones and rotting linen, as in the catacombs. Find Germany. It’s here somewhere. Between George Sand’s Indiana and Conrad’s Victory. Why does anyone remember? Why, out of the active emptiness of everyday, why draw Tuesday’s plate of pork and beans, one word in anger, bitten finger, brittle dream? I remember a nipple through a sweater—just the bump—and it gives me pleasure. Yet that nipple is of no more use to me. I remember a day during the war when l dozed off in a warm glade. Then I remember a roll of wine through my mouth, my first Cezanne, the blues and green, a line of Pope which rose from the rest to strike me:
                   Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
No more use to me. I remember London firemen pouring great gouts of water on a flaming hoarding while a whole wall went up beside them as if that other burning were some sort of social gaffe which ought to be ignored. I remember the hours I spent with my children collecting butterflies—the immense ... relief it was—but why? I scarcely know the difference, now, between an admiral and a painted lady, and when they flutter from flower to flower in the garden, they rarely detain my eye. No more use . . . than the hollow of the inner thigh ... to me ... to me .. . that delicious muscle shiver.
   Ah, yes, why remember. . . well,
   (1)   to match a past perception with a present image: Martha, hungry, mouthing my mouth as if it were an ice >< Martha rubbing a bit of lipstick from her teeth with the tip of a paper towel;
   (2)   to make tolerable a painful present with some pleasant recollections, such as thinking of Lou while screwing the wife;
   (3)    to entertain friends, because even the war is wonderful and funny as a story, and all my army buddies—those callous louts who made my mind crawl the way gunfire pressed my chest into the mud—they are cute cartoons and funny figures now: cronies of consciousness;
   (4)    to compile and order grievances, preserve insults, register slights and injuries, to husband hate;
   (5)    to number, name, and know by naming, to characterize, stereotype, sterilize, to poison the mind with a phrase, to be able to say of Marty that she has a codfishy caze ... a codfishy caze ... a codfishy caze;
   (6)    to retain a desired identity, to support our vision of ourselves as Julian Sorel or Saint the Joanie, the Count of Monte Cristo, Casanova, Mother Courage . . . ei! . . . Huckleberry Finn, or, in my case, the Hector Berlioz of History; and
   (7)    to share and compound a self, so that the isolation of the ego can be disguised as a joint venture, the way married people imagine they remember a common past (our porous apartment in Indiana, for instance), or Germans believe they share the same Frederick (and possess his greatness), or can look back together, proudly, at Barbarossa; and this is why the memory must be trained not to fetch up a disabling image, but must be lapdogged, and why history is so important to the vanity of nations.
          . . . first Zeus begot Remembrance by stealth: in the guise of her own gaze he enveloped her fair body from the inside of a mirror; next Meditation was brought to birth by buggery, though the god entered slowly, with a phallus suitably reduced; then, finally, Song was several times engendered by spitting in the mother’s mouth—the spit, however, of a god . . .
   O yes, we think we know why he wrote: Proust, Mann, Mad Meg, Lawrence, Rilke. The Parisian needed the security of absorbent walls and heavy blinds, the warmth of cottons, quilts, and flattery, the way the bed bent at the edges of his body, rose like pastry dough to swaddle him; and as his nervy sickness drew him through its fist his backbone grew soft, eventually, as old rags. Go ahead. Call upon Apollo. See if the mouse-god can cure you. Holla. Holla. So of the flatterous Frenchman we say we know why: to make some sense of what would otherwise have been a life of almost suffocating triviality, a round of parties as predictable in its undulating course and frozen forms as a platter of painted horses (a bloodless ring o’roses, ring-a-lievio), huge heavy wooden and plaster creatures, yet they slide on shimmering pins which fix them through the belly like butterflies ... we know why: to justify those visits,
the calling cards which snowed the silver trays of the socially fortunate, the customary country/seaside/mountain trips, resorts, those spas, the sojourns in enchanting Venice where the sun was seen to sink as Ruskin had arranged it must, from orange to purple, past to present, not omitting pink, in the square where pigeons feed like falling dust, where the Titians, Caravaggios, are coveted, where I felt the need to keep my pornographic NSDAP books concealed near my penis, though they caused the coverlet to swell there like bulbs left burning between seasons (what do they do down there in the dirt, down there?) (is not the work a pardon for a misspent life? a rescue? the creation of substance from shadow? for value occurs only in order, only in art and mathematics, science and the Third Reich, the work of bureaucrats like me and Alfred Jarry, Rosenberg and Ike).
   0 sure, we know why Proust wrote: to justify one man’s sordid sadomado ways to the interested asses of other men. And that, as we also know, requires an endless book.
To say—see—
                                   Weep you no more, sad fountains; Why need you flow so fast? Look how the snowy mountains
                what I have written; Heaven’s sun doth gently waste!
                To hear—feel—          But my Sun’s heavenly eyes
                                          View not your weeping, what I have said:         That now lies sleeping
                                    Softly, now softly lies Sleeping
And because I have dithered musically for nine lines (and shall venture but one verse and nine lines more in my life), and because John Dowland has set me to such sweet and docile measures, I expect my soul to be redeemed; 1 expect I shall forever be remembered, and eternally esteemed.
   1 built, of blocks, a town three hundred thousand strong, whose avenues were paved with a wine-colored rug and decorated by large leaves outlined inappropriately in orange, and on this leafage I’d often park my Tootsie Toy trucks, as if on pads of camouflage, waiting their deployment against catastrophes which included alien invasions, internal treachery, and world war. It was always my intention, and my conceit, to use up, in the town's construction, every toy I possessed: my electric train, of course, the Lincoln Logs, old kindergarten blocks—their deeply incised letters always a problem—the Erector set, every lead soldier that would stand (broken ones were sent to the hospital), my impressive array of cars, motorcycles, tanks, and trucks—some with trailers, some transporting gas, some tows, some dumps—and my squadrons of planes, my fleet of ships, my big and little guns, an undersized group of parachute people (looking as if one should always imagine them high in the sky, hanging from threads), my silversided submarines, along with assorted RR signs, poles bearing flags, prefab houses with faces pasted in their windows, small boxes of a dozen variously useful kinds, strips of blue cloth for streams and rivers, and glass jars for town water towers, or, in a pinch, jails. In time, the armies, the citizens, even the streets would divide; loyalties, friendships, certainties, would be undermined; the city would be shaken by strife; and marbles would rain down from formerly friendly planes, steeples would topple onto cars, and shellfire would soon throw aggie holes through homes, soldiers would die accompanied by my groans, ajid ragged bands of refugees would flee toward mountain caves and other chairs and tables.
   On Saturdays I would sometimes walk to town down Market Street, lingering in front of the long lawns which lay rolled out like rugs before the Orphans’
Home and the City Hospital, their faintly yellowish, underfertilized grass dotted with dandelions and defined by whitewashed rocks, sprinklers jerking and spewing like pinwheels during the dry days, and the blackbirds and robins stalking between the circles of spray like preachers ignoring a rain. Market Street was made of brick back then, uneven as a turbulent stream, sensuous and beautiful and better than the cars it carried. I’d dawdle near the windows of the pharmacy, which might have trusses or other obscurely obscene devices on display; and when at last I went by the church where Jerry jobbed for Jesus, I’d study the title of the sermon 1 might have to hear the next day. Across the street there was a small Italian grocery which, 1 remember, was regarded as intrusive when it first appeared. The owner's son played football for the high school team, so now it was like passing a place where some local dignitary had made his mark; and tins of olive oil decorated with exotic designs in silver filigree and dark outlining, gold roses and medallions of victory on a pink ground, were stacked at the site like a trumpet’s flourish. To me olive oil was something that came in skinny little bottles and was shaken over lettuce in discreet drops like perfume, consequently the effect of those towers—and the wide red cans of tomatoes, the long gray ropes of garlic and sheaves of thin brown barky loaves, the sausages as engorged as snakes, the big dark barrels of sardines, I supposed, pickles, olives (who knew what else lived in those salty ponds?), the huge smooth cheeses and jungle-colored peppers, purple eggplants, queerly shaped squash in white, orange, yellow, and green (nothing my mother ever let in the house), the frankly naked hams and raffia-webbed demijohns of wine— was somewhat the same as a carnival: the display was loud, vulgar, bombastic, and unbelievable, and I was at once frightened and tempted, intimidated and drawn. I went inside the store once with my father to buy beer, and I can still remember how my senses were assailed, my eyes blurred as though by brightness, and I can still see the waxy white paper speckled trouts were laid on, and a scatter' of flat white boxes everywhere on which
                   No.2 WhiteFish.
was darkly stenciled, not as a simple identifying label, but as an irreproachable judgment and an unimpeachable statement of fact.
  I would leave before noon, so there was no need to hurry, the matinee didn’t begin till one; and though I knew the route better than my own toes, I looked in all the windows as if someone were undressing just in back of the glass. Manikins might move in the right light, my face swim away in a flannel suit. I always started out prepared to be surprised, but the unexpected was, in fact,
quite exceptional. 1 was witness to an accident once, when a bread van struck a neighbor’s trike which had rolled, unridden, into the road, and one of its red wheels flew through the air like a Frisbee. A Frisbee . . . memory sees what I saw so differently. Another time a man keeled over outside the Malt Shop, blood spilling from his nose; and an ambulance with flashing lights raced twice through the Palmers' wide semicircular drive for no reason I could ever accept. The Palmers were wealthy, we thought, because their son, Dickie, played golf at the country club. Garages, swollen with what 1 imagined were shiny black Packards and shimmering Cadillacs, guarded the rear of the finer homes built along Market Street for that elegant half mile, but behind them were modest frame houses of the common kind I lived in, mostly inexpensive five- or six-room rentals now that there were so many people without a job or on strike at the mills. Tramps, if they had no luck with the sassy servants at the big back doors, would come to ours asking for some sort of work, and my mother would trade a raked front yard for a can of tomato soup she served with crackers, a paper spoon, and rum and Coke in a Dixie cup. The Concord grapes, which everybody’s grandmother had planted, now sprawled over dilapidated arbors, and were eaten by small boys and birds. In forty years I haven’t seen a buckeye (shiny as a nigger’s nip, we said), or one of those big yellow and black butterflies too beautiful to be real and too delicate to survive, or an oriole’s nest hanging loosely from a limb like a snagged sock. Folks watched their asparagus and rhubarb with a zealous eye, and were mean and vindictive about stolen fruit. Despite our landlords, who clutched a flat purse, properties were neat and carefully kept. We were all rich in hours off, if nothing else, and everyone puttered and rooted and diddled about, even the dogs. There were some broken back steps nearby, including one of ours, with treads about as rigid as a ripe banana, a perilous condition which further bespotted the neighborhood’s wop-sloppy Dalmatian name, my father said. There were a few rusty gutters, some cracked and slid shingles, and a lot of sudsy paint, but the windows were whole and well curtained, if too chintzed; gravel drives were raked, front walks stiffly broomed. Privet was the principal hedge; grass generally was coarse and crabby; most of the soft maples had crotch-rot and too many dead limbs (I knew from climbing them); while forsythias were often tangles of bloomless stems. Indeed, a shabbiness I neglected to notice, since it had come on as gradually through my miserable teens as my occluded complexion, had settled over the entire town like the smoke did when the factories were fired up. No one enjoyed our sweet, clean, sky-blue sky anymore, and complaints about soot on the sheets or furnace fumes in sweater wool went the way of that second cup of coffee. Still, sidewalks were shaded, the lawns mowed, the porches occupied by rockers and swings; summers were moist, hot, and quiet, the tar soft in the streets, their bricks warm as a cheek even well into evening.
  Inside Giovanni’s glorious grocery, the world had lifted its skirt, and 1 could look at what I ultimately learned was eggplant, marveling at the beauty of the soft glossy fruit, at its obvious inedibility, its incomprehensible name; and there, too, I would enjoy the braggadocio of those wonderfully garish tins I’d seen Governali's handsome halfback boy put up in a pile like letter blocks and towers for my towns.
                                    ******
                       OLIO Dl OLIVA 100% ITALIANO
                            IMPACCATO IN LUCCA
                                    ******
                        MED. D’ORO ST. LOUIS 1904
                        GRAN PREMIO MILANO 1906
                                    ******
ESP0SIZI0NI INTERNAZIONALI TORINO 1911-GENOVA 1914
                                    ******
  A few steps farther on (Oh-lee-oh, I sang, Oh-lee-vah), the sidewalk was no longer broken by the large oaks and elm trees whose roots undermined it, and you ran out of shade at precisely the moment it let your eyes up (to vocally envision Loo-cah—Mee-lann-oh—Tor-een-oh through vowels long as telescopes) and the street descended rather steeply toward a weedy set of Erie tracks (Jen-no-vah—Sent-Loo-eese) which determined, in traditional fashion, the better quarter of town. (Ess-poh-ziss-ee-oh-nee . . . Ess-poh-zits-ee-oh-nee? Inn-terr-nah-zee . . . nah-zee . . . oh-nah-lee.) Beyond them, as if the rails were a stream, the road rose up a hill which held the courthouse and its square, around which had gathered the grandest stores, the biggest bank, the most rococo movie house, an Episcopay-lee-an church like a fly at a feast, and a public library— on its steps an oddly styled stone lion with a gift horse’s doubtful mouth.
  Not here, but back in the Crawl, which is what we called that ratty Erie RR cut because of the exasperating start/stop and shuddersome crawl of its freights, was my grandpa s furniture store (conveniently near a siding I never saw used, although that was presumably why FEEIMEY’S FAIM101LV [FD=DKIMID° TOFUS wasn’t ensconced on the square); and I would make a point of inspecting its displays when I walked by to see whether my father might be folded over in one of those decorator chairs they featured like something bloody spilled on the cloth; but even when he was in the window like a soul on sale, he never looked up, never saw me; his spirit was not in the game, and I was glad. It completed my anonymity. I was usually singing “Addio a Napoli" anyway.
  For lunch I would stop at the Malt Mart and have one so thick the mixture rose more slowly than temperature through my straw. I’d also order a hamburger rare enough to bleed when I bit it, with quarter-inch rounds of pickle
laid over it like tiles across a porch. I had to suck hard, softening a chunk of bun with the malt and chewing calmly as a cow. 1 studied the world from a point almost outside it, since I was now an image in the glass for all those people swimming busily past, and my only worry was that 1 might meet someone I knew. However, the risk was small; the Malt Mart’s countermen were changed as often as underwear, and the two girls were as plain and serviceable as one of the stools. My sort didn’t go there; the place was too square, though square’ is not a word 1 would have used. 1 must remember that the memory always writes in an old man’s language. Then I purchased some of that solid chocolate they sold in rough hunks like stone from a quarry, and went off to watch Errol flash his Flynn in Captain Blood, or Leslie Howard fool France in the guise of a foppish fag. The movie melted in my eyes the way the chocolate melted sweetly in my mouth. And what could have been more wonderful than those innocent images, those black and white accounts of the lawless enemies of tyranny—among whom 1 was proud to count myself?
  Later I would tear myself away from the second feature (often a country comedy) and come blinking into the light like someone newly born. There, in the unreal glare of afternoon, I would sail away around the square, just as Plato said I could if I faced the Forms (such allusions are also an old man’s hobby), a cutlass thrust through my sash that was sharper than any store-bought blade or low-grade image, since it was created out of concepts, made of metaphors instead of metal; for when 1 slashed the mainsail with my sword and dropped lightly onto the deck like Douglas Fairbanks, it was upon the word toes’ I landed, legs alert in their harem pants; it was im-pah-cah-toh in Loo-cah, I sang while I swooped; and lo! at the rightly sung word there were all about me towers of stone, hillsides covered with flowers, cold lakes, ocher earth and planted fields, poplars lining the roads, cypresses surrounding the cemeteries, ancient churches, laden vines. The movie made a lousy muse.
  So 1 strolled around the square, shopping for shadows, looking for illusions in the windows, following my face as it followed me, until I reached the library, another lotusland; but I had been hard and swollen for it the whole day, invariably beguiled and brought erect by the promise of print, the volumes of Carlyle I might carry away, perhaps, books bellied by his flatulent style like Fal-staff’s shirt, and sinking from asides and the weight of his ponderous lines; yet where Frederick may be seen walking through some scrubby Potsdam woods with a fresh-cut stick and soft cocked hat, or where sight of a bored queen can be caught sneaking a pinch of snuff during the coronation, so that the new king has to hurl at her a look of well-merited fulminancy—the word by itself enough to dampen anyone’s dickie.
  Roads with honest, common, sawed-off names like Park, High, Market, Main, went out from the square like legs. On Bank there were still banks; Hill
Street was dutifully steep; Central and South were matter-of-factly geographical; Erie and Ohio paralleled the tracks and Mahoning followed the river, intersecting Ferry a block before Bridge; while Chestnut, Maple, Elm, and Oak once represented real trees, and were reserved for the first ring the city wore— the one which married prosperous businesses to stately homes; nevertheless, it wasn’t long before names became liars like the people they served, and signified the presence of the developer like a measle the disease. My walk back was on paths of increasing deceit. The tacky, curbless, oil-and-cinder streets which made up my neighborhood were called Adelaide and Bonnie Brae, Woodbine and Belvedere, and the appeal of their signposts to our pretensions was as glib and easy as the dreams they invoked were vulgar and cheap. Oak Knoll destroyed both the knoll and the oaks it was named for; Meadowbrook ran beside a dry ditch; 1 don’t know where Cumberland came from. Even then lines on speculators’ maps said Peachtree and Inglenook; boulevards and avenues and elegant circles were already disappearing in favor of drives, courts, lanes, ways, terraces, and hollows. Already the suburban mentality (Satan’s lazy servant) was in sorry evidence. Formerly roads went straight when they could and curved when they had to, but now it is salesmanship and cutie-pie caprice which causes them to curl up like wounded worms. Well, I think with pleasure of the day when whorehouses will fill Squire Lane, antique shops dot Ellenwood, Sagamore will smell of fries, grease, and gasoline, and in the windows on Hillandale Drive little propped, dime-store-designed signs will say My infrequent friend, Flenry Herschel, has a house on Litany Lane, but the fact does not appear to disturb him, he says "Litany Lane” without a grimace or any sign of shame; but it pained me, even as a boy, to admit 1 lived on Bonnie Brae, or to write on letters my return address.
   Although Elm Street has long since lost its trees to disease and its fine old homes are dental clinics, cleaners, barber and beauty shops, or mortuaries now—their spacious front porches nailed meanly shut or glass-bricked up like bars, their large lawns little parking lots, their facades at night lit by a loud, harsh, pearly light—its name still stands for a past that was energetic and objective, like Freight Street and Brewery and Court; so even if Memory Lane and Happy Hollow date like dresses, and we can place them in their period the way we can calendar kids called Ozzie or girls named Cheryl, the sort of history they contain refers exclusively to states of mind, to fads and furbelows, to illusions, and points only at the people who chose them, and never toward the things or persons they stand for: not at Marjean, the timid little math whiz, or Junior James, the football star, or Fat Freddie, the schoolyard bully, but to their thoughtless, arrogant, tasteless parents.
   1 would return over the slow roll of the hill about as rapidly as the shade did, prolonging my liberty and my pleasure. About halfway home there was a drug-
store which kept a stock of Pocket Books in a round wire rack, and I would spend my final twenty-five cents on Lost Horizon, which had been published as #t and therefore honored above the rest, or on a heavy red-edged tome like An Outline of History, thick as a steak, or on The Story of Mankind, one of the earliest. These glistening little books stole the breath. Their covers were made from a kind of cellophane which had been bonded to the cardboard, and this created a surface so protective you could safely set down on it a sweating glass, although the dye they’d used to stain the edges of the pages would redden a warm palm; and in time, too, the cellophane would loosen and be sloughed off like old skin. Still, the type was crisp and sprightly, the paper didn't yellow, the backs cracked only occasionally, the print of the previous page left a pleasant afterimage the way the chocolate lingered in my mouth, and the books could be collected like baseball cards or bottle caps or stamps. I desired a full set in the worst way, and 1 fed my quarters into the series as though it were a slot; but, of course, the enterprise expanded quickly from its first ten toward its first hundred, so finally I had to call a halt (at #92, The Pocket Bible, I remember), and with that decision I lost all hunger for completeness despite the fact I still had gaps (The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club, for instance). At least I wouldn’t have to purchase #107, The Pocket Book of Etiquette, which had been announced. The cost of my hobby had also risen with the enlargement of the published line, and required an increasing number of small thefts—loose change from pockets, sugar crocks, and drawers—which I feared were finally being noticed, and suspicious watches set.
   Indeed, chance was queen and happenstance the king, for I found #65 (a work which had eluded me) quite by luck on top of a pile of trash in the alley behind Iffia®           AoU ©0®SS Step where I sometimes scrounged for
chartreuse, scarlet, or raisin-colored shards through which I could perceive a transformed world. #65 needn’t have been O. Henry; it might have been a mystery just as well, or someone’s autobiography, or a kid’s classic like Pinocchio. 1 read them all, in any case; it was my morality. If, in the set which was filling my shelves, #20 was missing, I’d look up the title in the list they printed in the back of every book, and speculate about The Return of the Native, or shiver with anticipation at owning, someday, a copy of The Bowstring Murders.
   My appetite was innocent and indiscriminate. 1 went from The Story of Mankind to The Corpse with the Floating Foot with scarcely a blink or hiccup. Imaginary murders amused me as much as actual ones. The past was as fictional as the future. For writers like Van Loon or readers my age, mankind had a history because its history told a story; there was an incipient “working out” in all things human which encouraged the hope of a happy resolution, even if it was only discovering the guilty, which GUI is devoted to doing, just like
Charlie Chan or the other sleuths in those paper-covered books. Certainly I could not understand, then, how completely the world survived as the word, or that it was the historian’s duty to outshout Time and talk down Oblivion. Nor could I know that the last little existence my Malt Shop might have (or this spindle-like rack with its beckoning books, my stupidly named and simple streets, those shining tins of imported oil, their golden roses and musical medallions) would consist of a few foolish sentences, these random jottings, a small sheaf of loose pages carefully concealed from any likely reader.
   The particular pleasure a day like that gave me, the freedom from all concern I felt, and the lightness of spirit which followed; the sense that my life lay wholly inside me where 1 hoped it would redouble itself and resound like music in a church; that it could not, in such sacred circumstances, be harmed or hampered; that the hours ahead of me were mine the way my breath was, and consequently had to be sweet and fulfilling beyond any other’s; and that my companions (my walk, my malt, my movie, my paperback book) had been thoroughly tested and could be counted on absolutely, inasmuch as I needed them—needed them mightily—since 1 opened the world and went in naked when 1 took my stroll, watched the screen, entered O. Henry or the life of Cellini (#42); and because my friends would not fail me any more than Virgil would have forsaken Dante (why should they? those chunks of chocolate had no better mouth), 1 could pass through the furnace and come away unscathed; life could be lived from the inside out as it ought to be, and savored, witnessed, even saved, no matter what otherwise it was: these youthful feelings, these exhilarations, are really gone for good, and cannot even be represented now; for now 1 know too much; now I know precisely how momentous, how right, how rare, yet how ill-fledged and formed of illusion, they were; how Spinoza would have regarded my tawdry little props, my shallow pleasures, as negations, as fears, as pure passivities, and replaced them with a much more phallic and constructive love, a love for thought, for relevant theory; no resplendent tower of oil for him, or dreams confined in sausage skins, but ideas resembling a regiment in review; I know how Rilke, who also understood the importance of ponds and blue days, who had felt the tug of a balloon at its string, the ever-so-sweet ice melting slowly in the mouth, would have agreed about the way the balloon brings that terror and its relief together in one fragile sphere of lightness, and in his dark punctilious garb and girlish mind, I know how he would have grieved for the agreement; yet those magical moments of complete release were burst almost as soon as they were shaped; they were never bees, and there is no map for their return, not even as Ulysses, so that a long-abandoned book might smell a welcome-home in childhood hands again; nevertheless, though presently as flat and ready for the sink as the dregs of a party, these
emotions were powerful and plentiful then, as the first flzz is; consequently, when I got home and went to my room to read (#20 that day in my catch like a fine fish), I was carried past my aunt’s offer of taffy in unremovable wrappers, my mother’s worried questions (what have you got there? did you enjoy your day? will you be down for dinner?), and my father's complaints (what did that cost? you’ve been out of the house all day! I thought I asked you to cut the grass), by the continuous uprush of my passion toward its fated pop; and then until dinner I would die down, as no lover would later let me, in the language and lap of Shakespeare or Carlyle or Mann or Cervantes.
   In order that 1 would not be given a false sense of their reality, the characters who pretended to breathe and move about and talk in #20 were called Clym Yeobright or Grandfer Cantle, Wildeve, Thomasin, Fairway and Susan Nunsuch, Diggory Venn and Eustacia Vye, and I must admit these silly artificial names were repellent even to my eager and injudicious ear; nor was the cover any inducement, for it showed a vacuously handsome young man dressed in a conservative blue suit, white shirt, and floppy bow tie, who is gazing over his shoulder toward some pink hills on which there improbably appears a marble edifice resembling the Lincoln Memorial, while an equally empty and conventionally drawn young woman with windblown hair is pulling on and otherwise beseeching his other shoulder, as if to say: do not dream of such things . . . come away . . . come away; nevertheless, the first words I read when I opened the book were on page 357 (as Fate & Hardy had arranged it): A Lurid Light Breaks In Upon a Darkened Understanding; and how could 1 (or anyone) resist that? Besides, just below the mausoleum, William Lyon Phelps, in white type, is quoted saying "I have always regarded The Return of the Native as his masterpiece,” and who could remain unmoved by William Lyon Phelps—in white type? Furthermore, the initial page, always crucial, passed every test, with its promises and divisions, its portentous opening paragraph like the great door of a church, its exotic setting and strange names, the rolling orchestration of its prose.
                                 BOOK FIRST The Three Women Chapter 1
                A Face on Which Time Makes But Little Impression
      A SATURDAY afternoon in November was approaching the time of twilight, and the vast tract of unenclosed wild known as Egdon Heath embrowned itself moment by moment. Overhead the hollow stretch of whitish cloud shutting out the sky was as a tent which had the whole heath for its floor.
   Between the ages of twelve and fourteen, 1 should say, this sort of thing is irresistible, and a word like ‘embrowned’ is every bit as stirring as ‘fulminancy,’ Carlyle’s piece of cheese. Anyway, I went for it, and until I encountered the text again (in London, during the blitz), I had been encouraged by the critics to believe that this work might be, indeed, a masterpiece; but then, when a whole wall of books blew about like leaves, and Hardy’s novel gave me a hearty clap on the back like an old friend, the mendacity of the literary mind was shown to me in something resembling a revelation as I flipped through the book’s pages and grinned . . . and laughed sourly . . . and grinned again. 1 had been duped. I was a dunce. And those others—they were educated, older, they knew—they were liars. It may have been at that time that my ascent of Mount Parnassus slowed, and I began to turn toward history.
   Now, though, as I hold #20 in my hand (for I have it still, and The Four Million [#65] as well as others, most with the pages white, their Perma-Gloss intact, and covers firm), I am brought by chance to passages of somber, quite bombastless beauty, and I find that my present feelings, like the rest of my life, are in a state of insecurity and confusion. 1 shall copy it down, because that’s all 1 can do. But ‘bombastless’—there’s a word Carlyle could not complain of.
          There lay the cat asleep on the bare gravel of the path, as if beds, rugs and carpets were unendurable. The leaves of the hollyhocks hung like half-closed umbrellas, the sap almost simmered in the stems, and foliage with a smooth surface glared like metallic mirrors. A small apple tree, of the sort called Ratheripe, grew just inside the gate, the only one which thrived in the garden, by reason of the lightness of the soil; and among the fallen apples on the ground beneath were wasps rolling drunk with the juice, or creeping about the little caves in each fruit which they had eaten out before stupefied by its sweetness. By the door lay Clym’s furze-hook and the last handful of faggotbonds she had seen him gather; they had plainly been thrown down there as he entered the house.
   Find Planmantee. Somewhere he’s smiling like a half-opened tin. The books begin at the floor and continue to the ceiling as species do in Aristotle. They span the doors, in stacks crowd the closet, consume every corner, ring the radiator: four walls and a window full of als oh: models, fictions, phantoms, wild surmises, all the essential human gifts: dreams, preachments, poetry, and other marvels of misfeeling. There are books in the drawers, on the desk and table. Cheap. Fat. Tattered. Innocent. Grim. Piers Plowman. EIPHNH. Three Weeks. Celine. Alone. In disrepute. In mobs. I could not live in such proximity with
any person. With Unamuno, the beautifully named, with Marlowe—yes. Aquinas. Schopenhauer. Galileo. Bede. Call each to me with a finger that tickles the top of the spine. They play into my hands like cards. They breed.
                                      0 grant me one ripe time; the strength, just once, in one brief line,
                       to shake the sacred tree from whose thought-quickened boughs our earthly beauty hangs till all the orchards of the world, as though in a wind of sympathy, let fall their fruit onto the apron of the ground, for any deep sweet bite to make its momentary mouth eloquent with the juice.
                             Willkommen dann, o Stille der Schattenwelt!
                     Zufrieden bin ich, wenn auch mein Saitenspiel Mich nicht hinab geleitet; einmal
                           Lebt ich, wie Gotter, und mehr bedarfs nicht.
Froissart. Adams. Gobineau. Like checkers, some king the carpet’s squares. Sober books. Bawds. They preoccupy my armchair like an injury. They press in. Ockham. Austen. Von Frisch. Pound. In overcoats. In satins. With illustrations. Aprons. Pindar. Heavy. Worn. Hardy, Hawthorne, Hazlitt, Hemingway, Henty, Hopkins, Housman, Hume. With loose bent torn dry yellow pages and broken glueless backs, some shaken outside of themselves, Webster, Ford, Lombroso, Chapman, Cleland, Chaucer, Berkeley, Boccaccio, Swift, by time, humidity, rough handling, their ferocious contents, Flavius Josephus, Bussy DAmbois, some scratched, some marred with annotations, underlinings, exclamations, thumbprints, smears, Poe, Thomas, Plautus and Petronius, stained, checked, dented, mottled, eaten. Ibsen. And if anyone I knew—Chekhov, Veblen—were like that, 1 would flee them. But from Bradley? Burns? Bernanos? Browning? Gilded edges? Gaudy. Slick. They know how to age—each—they fly through time like a stone. King Lear. Colette. Une Vie. Le Corbusier. La Rochefoucauld. 1 have thrown them. Yes. They have broken me. Slammed them down. Been brought low. "The Good Anna.” Keller. “Boule de suif." Embossed. In suede. Defoe. Received for birthdays, with a ribbon or a tasseled string and soiled by dedications, nameplates, erasures like rapacious moths, librarians’ pastes and inks. Great Expectations. We speak of their backs, their fronts, their spines . . . their bodies. Funny. Flatulent. Forsaken. Fabre. Fielding. Frost. Find
Planmantee. He’s somewhere—living his life inside a life like Madame Bovary— somewhere where nothing else is as it is, where everything’s as something else is, resembling the resembled to infinity—in metaphysics, mathematics, magic— where all are kith and kin and none are kind. 1 see Homer. He’s ceased singing, and sirens now warn us away. My lines suffer interruption, and these covers close over me. Hegel. Iamblichus. Pliny. Plato. Where is the Western Front now, you foolish old man? that trench of entrancing shadows, cardboard cutouts, supple fires? Don’t he to me. The pokey where Socrates swigged his Dramamine was a hole in a hill. And Plotinus is also a cavern. These days the darkness that lies under the mind like the cool shade of a stream bottom yields our only safety, for to rush to the light is to Gloucester-out the eyes; bedazzled by death, to go over the top at someone else’s whistle and war shout, to fume up and fizz fast, die dirty, die young. Chatterton. What is a book but a container of consciousness, a draft of cantos? Through a curtain of concepts I watch blemishless girls, young Kierkegaard in all his disguises, Empedocles as a fish, bird, and girl, Stendhal and Byron like boys about their boasting, Boswell accosting his whores, Cellini, another braggart, honest Casanova, Pepys at table, Henry Miller, Gide committing Chopin and other indiscretions, Cudworth, Claudel, Jeremy Taylor, Morike and then Baudelaire—the most beautiful name of all. Vico. Verlaine. Michelangelo—the most beautiful—Mallarme—the most beautiful—Sophocles—the most beautiful name of all. The names of idols, vandals, heroes, lovers, cutthroats and cutpurses, gods ... of guttersnipes and villains, thugs, poseurs, seducers, patsies . . . drunks . . . *|Hear me, Hesiod: to sing of what will be, as well as all that was, takes more than the gift of a voice, these days, it takes a stomach stronger than a tomb. *JThe gods speak only of the gods. *jln those days, then, what are we to do? What have we done? Villon. *(There's Demosthenes polishing his teeth with stones. Quintilian. Cicero. «|0 we’ve had speakers of such spectacular speechifying power God’s word is but a cough before a sneeze beside them. Who, if not Hitler, like a wind through wheat, made the heads of the masses dance as though their hats held feet? Isocrates. Calhoun. «jl am the thimble of History, Mad Meg said. I drive the needle in. *[What did the Muses want of you when they offered that olive-fruiting stick? compliments in front of every song and flattery following. Ah, they make me sick. Simonides. Theopompus— not the nicest—and the names of fairies, tarts, and sister-suckers, people of paper, paper people, Acton, Lecky, Maitland, Froude, Jewboys, jack-offs, nig-gerlovers, Thoreau, Twain, men of means and men of parts, Marcus Aurelius, Chesterfield, King James, whom have you Muses so lightly laureled? verbal farts and fiddle-scrapers, every kind of diligent compiler, pipsqueak, nail-biter, fact-fucker, dissolute tutor, bombathlete, hairy bluenose, cheat and bore ... let me think my way along this wall . . . Clarendon, Longinus . . . cutaways, cutesies, castoffs, creampuffs, chokethroats, alley cats, cowards, turncoats, hounds from
hell, boys from Harvard, kids from Yale, and other godsends (as they say they are and pray to be), saints, archangels, showoffs, sycophants, suicides, and some like me: desperate failures, resentful assassins . . . yet here—as nowhere—even one’s enemies are friends, even one’s superiors are unenvied. Dreiser. Dumas. Dilthey. Hart Crane. Rimbaud. Ronsard. Is there a richness anywhere to match this? «(0 yes, O yes, O yes, O yes, I am aware, O how I know, that there are those who write like tenors, stock their books as though each were a fish pond, dry goods, hardware, or a pantry; who jerry-build, compose sentences like tangled spaghetti, piss through their pens and otherwise relieve themselves, play at poetry as if they were still dressing dolls, order history as though it were an endless bill of lading; but there were genuine bookmen once: Burton, Montaigne, Rabelais and other list-makers, Sir Thomas Browne and Hobbes, in the days when a book was not just a signal like a whiff of smoke from a movie Indian or a carton of cold crumb-covered carryout chicken, but a blood-filled body in the world, a mind in motion like a cannonball. Spinoza sent our freedom flying through just such a trajectory. Kant rearranged our thoughts forever. Calvin did us in. *[How many volumes of Magus Tabor? Ten of Wordsworth bound in blue, gray, and gold. Twenty-five of Parkman. Lermontov: two. When I complained to Tabor that my contemporaries were mostly contraptionists, he grinned. Never mind, my boy, a book is a holy vessel—ah, indeed, yes, it will transmogrify a turd. Nordau. Gentile. Husserl. Hartmann. Bentham. James and John Stuart Mill. And of Goethe, Schiller, Fichte, Schelling—how many? Outside I hear the power mowers mow the snow. Of Herder, Heidegger, Heine, Helmholtz, Speng-ler, Werfel, Weber? Open any. Karl Jaspers. Ernst Jiinger. A crack like a chasm. Vega. Natsume, Quevedo. The creaking door in a horror story. Gorki. Heliodorus, Apollinaire: the most beautiful names of all. Every cover lifts as though it lay above a cellar stairway, hid a hold. A hold. There’s the one in Conrad’s Typhoon, full of Chinamen and their money flung about in the darkness by the storm. Our cellar doors are warped and difficult to lift. Rain leaks in, leaves collect, insects prosper, mold forms. Do descend: come in, the witch says, smiling with her slit. Do. D’Annunzio. Chamberlain. Carco. Krafft-Ebing. Huysmans. Sacher-Masoch. De Sade. All the dirty old gentlemen and their Victorian foreskins. I could not in my life remember so many of my friends. Southwell, for example. Shelley. Donne.
         In eaves sole sparowe sitts not more alone,
         Nor mourning pelican in desert wilde,
         Than Sely I, that solitary mone,
           From highest hopes to hardest happ exild:
         Sometyme, 0 blisful tyme! was Vertue’s meede,
         Ayme to my thoughtes, guide to my word and deede.
   The man of action has a destiny, a star he follows, and it draws him on like the Magi, or so it’s said; the taillight of a car, it’s said; the flag of a deer. The creator courts the muse, pays tribute and pursues: sucks, sips, sniffs, puffs, pops, screws—for the favor of his Fancy. The visionary sees the future like a dream-draped dressmaker’s dummy, as silks pinned to the canvas skin of a shameless wire-veined manikin. But we historians, we poets of the past tense, we wait for our tutelary spirits to find us; we sit in one place like the spider; and until that little shiver in the web signals the enmeshment of our prey, we look within for something to lighten our nighttime, the weight of our patience: the fluorescent face of a bedside clock, for example, enamel nailshine, bleached sheet.
   What a glorious ring it had once—the call: hoorne, Moved cow/iany, of ^,'hiuAeA, /et u6 timfe oeev voiced to accomfi/ilh the fuhhneM of a/liowg,, ffPhioe-
IwA of the thich haor,     in the mtiht of fxi.
   The sawier painters rendered the star in the form of a fiery crucifix, but for we historians, we poets of consumed time, it is just the reverse: we begin on the cross, hung in our flesh like the crossed sticks of the scarecrow, and end in a highchair deciphering our cereal box, receiving the fabulous gifts of imaginary kings, and predicting an unbearable future.
   There are Muses for the several sorts of writing, but none for any kind of reading. Wouldn’t one need divine aid to get through The Making of Americans, Ivanhoe, Moll Flanders, or Grace Abounding?
   When I was in high school 1 had to write an essay duplicating the manner and subject of Bacon’s “On Reading," and 1 remember including all the comfortable cliches. 1 said nothing about how books made me masturbate. I said nothing about nightmares, about daydreaming, about aching, cock-stiffening loneliness. I said something about wonder and curiosity, the improvement of character, quickening of sensibility, enlargement of mind, but nothing about the disappearance of the self in a terrible quake of earth. 1 did not say that reading drove a knife into the body. I did not say that as the man at breakfast calmly spoons his oatmeal into his mouth while words pass woundlessly through his eyes, he divides more noisily than chewing, becomes a gulf, a Red Sea none shall pass over, dry-shod cross. There is no miracle more menacing than that one. 1 did not write about the slow return from a story like the ebb of a fever, the unique quality it conferred which set you apart from others as though touched by the gods. I did not write about the despair of not willing to be oneself or the contrary despair of total entel-echy. 1 did not write about reading as a refuge, a toy drug, a pitiless judgment. Ah, Walther von der Vogelweide, Wolfram von Eschenbach. You could read in the roses just where my head lay. Nor did I say anything about putting magical words in my mouth such as Hausen or Morungen wrote to
make a medieval miracle of my mind; because I became the consciousness that composed the poem or the paragraph: I grew great and ornate like Browne or severe as Swift or as rich and thick as Shakespeare, snappy as Pope. There is Buchner, Raspe, Richard Dehmel. There is Stefan George and Stephen Spender. Ah, Guido Cavalcanti. A cave. A cunt. Camus. The gentle muse of Hartmann von Aue or that of the Nightingale of Hagenau— Reinmar—
              Nieman seneder suoche an mich deheinen rat: ich mac min selbes leit erwenden niht.
is also the muse of the madman: Smart, Clare, Cowper, Blake . . . thought, word, deed . . . Nietzsche, Holderlin, Hitler. The most beautiful name of all. Oh? So? Gotcha now. Which name? Whose? What’s that you say? Lorca and Calderon? How convenient. How classy. Jose Garcia Villa. Just the other day these lines of exiled ink raced like motes from Hopkins’ kind of Catholic eye across my specs:
                                   To-fro,angel! Hiving,verb!
                              First-lover-and-last-lover,grammatiq:
                         Where,rise,the,equitable,stars,the,roses,of,the zodiac,
                              And,rear,the,eucalypt, towns,of,love:
                                   — Anchored,Entire, Angel:
                           Through, whose, huge, discalced, arable, love,
                         Bloodblazes,oh,Christ’s,gentle,egg: His, terrific, sperm.
   Behind a wall of words I watch the girls. Pavese. The streets are dry and a light is burning at the back of the pharmacy.
   One of the shames of my childhood, one of the signs of my unstable sexuality, one of the sources of discontent and provocation, was my weak whistle. It carried,'like a whisper, mostly wind, and could flutter a candle on a cake, but never beckon a dog, achieve attention, turn a head in a crowd, signify excitement. I foozed and miffled and whoo’d and wet the air without achieving a single acceptable male-made expression of amazement, nor could I do the forked-finger bit, causing my breath to scream like some banshee as it squeezed between my teeth. Even at my present age 1 can barely carry a nursery tune through pursed lips. So what am I thinking of now, as I try to whistle up a favoring wind? Who, among the gods, will hear a hooosh?
               From the womb of Memory as Eros from the wind-egg, emerged the Muses, three originally, called Castilia, Pimpla, and Aganippe, and likened frequently to the freshets, to the mountain springs—quick, clear, sudden, sparkling, cold—which bickered down the slopes of Mount Flelicon and Mount Parnassus. They were, in order of their birthdays: Recollection, Contemplation, Celebration, later corrupted three times over by unnameable panders and innumerable pimps, cock-bauds, ass and cunt collectors, who were satisfied simply to enumerate areas of inspirational activity rather than illumine its dark conditions, elements, and causes, and went about it all so recklessly that soon there was a muse for spilled milk as well as one for premature ejaculation.
                  To perceive ... to ponder . . . and to praise: riihmen, das ists!
   In my youth ... my sacred youth ... in eaves sole sparowe sat not more alone than I ... in my youth, my saucer-deep youth, when I possessed a mirror and both a morning and an evening comb ... in my youth, my pimpled, shamefaced, sugared youth, when I dreamed myself a fornicator and a poet; when life seemed to be ahead somewhere like a land o’ lakes vacation cottage, and I was pure tumescence, all seed, afloat like fuzz among the butterflies and bees, when I was the bursting pod of a fall weed; when 1 was the hum of sperm in the autumn air, the blue of it like watered silk, vellum to which I came in a soft cloud,
0  minstrel galleons of Carib fire, 1 sang then, knowing naught, clinging to the tall slim wheatweed which lay in a purple haze along the highway like a cotton star... in my fumbling, lubricious, my uticated youth, when a full bosom and a fine round line of Keats, Hart Crane, or Yeats produced in me the same effect—a moan throughout my molecules—in my limeade time, my uncorked innocence, my jellybelly days, when I repeated G/oo di Odva like a tenor; then I would touch the page in wonder as though it were a woman, as though
1  were blind in my bed, in the black backseat, behind the dark barn, the dim weekend tent, last dance, date's door, reaching the knee by the second feature, possibly the thigh, my finger an urgent emissary from my penis, alas as far away as Peking or Bangkok, so I took my heart in my hand, O my love, O my love, I sighed, O Christina, Italian rose; my inflated flesh yearning to press against that flesh becoming Word~a word-words which were wet and warm and
responsive as a roaming tongue; and her hair was red, long, in ringlets, kiss me, love me up, she said in my anxious oral ear; I read: Milton! thou shouldst be living at this hour; for I had oodles of needs, if England didn’t; I was nothing but skin, pulp, and pit, in my grapevine time, during the hard-on priesthood of the poet; because then—in my unclean, foreskinned, and prurient youth—I devoutly believed in Later Life, in Passion, in Poetry, the way I thought only fools felt about God, prayer, heaven, foreknowledge, sin; for what was a poem if not a divine petition, a holy plea, a prophecy; and in that BrassBrite Tomorrow, that FineLine time, having left my youth with a leap as Hart Crane had his life (a simile which should have taught me something, which should have been a warning), 1 believed 1 would finally be what I believed in; I would really live what 1 had dreamed of; I would rape and write and enrich myself; tongue a tender ear, a velutinous cunt, kiss and compose with one mouth, in the same breath, and maybe fly a plane like Raoul Lufbery and learn German so 1 could recite my Rilke during daring Immelmann turns, during any break between books or other coital excesses: kannst du dir, I’d chant, kannst du dir denn denken dass ich jahre, so ... a stranger, a pelican in desert wilde, no to-fro angel, hiving verb, though poets were the bees of the invisible, Rilke said, and everybody religiously repeated it through my dubious youth—ein Fremder unter Fremden fahre—a stranger among strangers, myself the strangest, Kohler the kookiest, because 1 could never bring myself to enter adolescence, but kept it about like a bit of lunch you think you may eat later, and later come upon at the bottom of a bag, dry as dust, at the back of the refrigerator, bearded with mold, or caked like sperm in the sock you’ve fucked, so that gingerly, then, you throw the mess out, averting your eyes, just as Rainer complained he never had a childhood— what luck!—never to have suffered birthpang, nightfear, cradlecap, lake in your lung; never to have practiced scales or sat numbly before the dentist’s hum or picked your mother up from the floor she’s bled and wept and puked on; never to have been invaded by a tick, sucked by a leech, bitten by a spider, stung by a bee, slimed on by a slug, seared by a hot pan, or by paper or acquaintance cut, by father cuffed; never to have been lost in a crowd or store or parking lot or left by a lover without a word or arrogantly lied to or outrageously betrayed—really what luck!—never to have had a nickel roll with slow deliberation down a grate, a balloon burst, toy break; never to have skinned a knee, bruised a friendship, broken trust; never to have had to conjugate, keep quiet, tidy, bathe; to have lost the chance to be hollered at, bullied, beat up (being nothing, indeed, to have no death), and not to have had an earache, life’s lessons to learn, or sums to add reluctantly right up to their bitter miscalculated end—what sublime good fortune, the Greek poet suggested—because Nature is not accustomed to life yet; it is too new, too incidental, this shiver in the stone, too novel altogether, and would just as soon (as Culp prefers to say) cancer it; erase, strike, stamp it out—
this dubbed in youth, this gicky GroBoy time—so that I would never have been jeered at, called Bullocky Bill on account of my tiny testicles and puny weenie, had I not been available, or caused to cough in a long naked line, to spread my rash-eaten cheeks to the amusement of a hundred eyes, or in a park in Prague gently jacked off by a boy who fondled me from behind a newspaper (or was it a magazine?), napkin neatly in his idle hand; and shame need never have lit me like a match, as 1 burned my slender Being back then, in my old cold youth, until its head was black—best never to drag a breath out of the competing wind, the Greek poet advised, because Being is basically made of heartless hunks and soulless flabs; it is inert, resists flow, dislikes disturbance, distrusts goals; in fact, it is fat as a Buddha, sluggish, still as statues, and as pitilessly bronze.
   BEING. Holy word. Being cannot be recognized unless it succeeds in Seeming. So Gorgias asserted. Yet Seeming, itself, will be weak and ineffective unless it succeeds in Being. Paradox #75.
   Your skin was an ocean of sky sliding toward me. There's ink on my thumb. Plato and Gorgias—Lou—yes, you and 1—suddenly Thucydides—are names that occur to me. There’s the unstraightened deck of my manuscript. Mad Meg. The thick rug under me. Anxiety. The tunnel of my sleeve. How can history be a record of o\)(ria? or of life in a chair? Endless journey. Yet 1 had her in it. Act pleased. I did act pleased. Don’t hold back. And I groaned as 1 was coming. There, between her parted hairs, I acted out my pleasure. So she was pleased, and pretended to come, too, to please me. Aaaaaaaah . . . etc. And if 1 like a lover lie, and the lie’s believed, hasn’t A of appearance become reality? Then, Lou, as you turn to me, full of the love I’ve laid inside you like a shiny ceramic egg, I am 14 informed by the feeling I originally bewinded; love rolls round on my love like a spindle winding, enlarging me with what is mine until I fatten up from
   BEING. Holy word. Being cannot be recognized unless it succeeds in Seeming. So Gorgias asserted. Yet Seeming, itself, will be weak and ineffective unless it succeeds in Being. Paradox #75.
   Your skin was an ocean of sky sliding toward me. There’s ink on my thumb. Plato and Gorgias—Lou—yes, you and I—suddenly Thucydides—are names that occur to me. There’s the unstraightened deck of my manuscript. Mad Meg. The thick rug under me. Anxiety. The tunnel of my sleeve. How can history be a record of o\)CTia? or of life in a chair? Endless journey. So I paid the kid off in cigarettes and candy. I was pleased. But I didn’t move a muscle, make a sound. The boy knew how. My face was that of a fellow perusing his paper, sonny beside him
on the bench, sort of asleep at his side, shaded from the sun by the big man’s jews-paper. The air was as cool as his clever fingers. He knew how. Then the boy giggled and said, Mister, you’re no bigger here than I am. I didn’t mind. Perhaps it was enough like his own to give him skill, tenderness, and a tight grip when the time came, and he caught me like a shortstop grabs a grounder. Sadly 1 fell from
   Seem to Being. The actor is reacted to, thus acts, so is, and history cannot close itself to dream and every night’s hypocrisy.
   1 said I’m such an easy fool. It was an easy thing to say. But I am not easy. I'm sly. I'm all difficulty like tangled hair. I admitted the charge and wrote down the sentence callously. Shouldn't I shake when I write such lies? Mad Meg shook. For Meg was mad. Shook until he died. Of aspenation. Rattle of wind in the lungs like leaves. But I’m not father to myself to hold in fear and trembling. In fact, when I am caught by such a judge as I am when I am over me, both of us are pleased. So much for that. So much for honesty.
   O such a small thing! Pooh! 1 have fattened up, though my cock still cannot cast its shadow and rarely comes out. Why bring up, fuss over, mess with, such a small thing? pshaw! small lie, small confusion, a little weakness, brief forgetting, tiny distortion ... 1 return like someone on a swing . . .
               Mad Meg in the Maelstrom
   If I bent every hair on the head of history in the same way, its skull would be cheerful and curly.
   Well, I saw him often after that: at his home, occasionally in the park where he walked, and of course in that absurd great hall where he lectured.
   Look at me, Kohler. I’m small, eh? even tiny, you might say. Yet I’ve the bones of a giant. I limp. You see? 1 limp. Yet I’ve enormous speed. My voice is high, ja? leminine, some call it—all right—I’ve overheard the jokes—it’s light, it’s thin. But it strikes a blow like a truncheon. Then my head, Kohler—see?—my head is white where it isn’t bald; my face is bent and creased and quite caved in. And my eyes protrude; my nose is hairy. Hah—shit—god. Ugly, ja? And I've this sickness inside me. Yet 1 am handsome as a Prussian prince, and like them, immoderately loved. Oh, Kohler—greatness—let me tell you, Kohler, because they've got it all wrong—greatness—greatness doesn’t lie in health or size or stride or carriage. Hoo—no—tee hee, William, tee hee—how absurd. Running, jumping, throwing spears or inscribing lead plates . . . god-a-mercy.
Greatness doesn’t rest on any quality of thought or kind of mind like a teaspoon on a table: on subtlety—hebe jeebee Joseph—on precocity or quickness—jam-may! kiddies, what a concept!—ah! on the strange, unique, original, profound, then—such holy ghosts, eh?—or the vast and threatening Sublime somehow—what immaculate blah!
   1 had to walk quickly to keep up, I remember. Tabor half-skipped, milling his arms, turning his torso back and forth—facing front, then facing me as I tried to stay alongside. He was like a pointed stick you might spin to start a fire.
   Consider Little Hans, Kohler—do—do—oh, ja, yes, do con-sid-er him. He does long complicated sums aged one, reads Greek at three, plays Beethoven at five, although his bitsy feet can barely reach the pedals . . . well, he's insignificant. Who cares? Will he reason any better, when he’s grown, than your John Stuart Mill, a prodigy too? 1—and history—shit on him. No. It doesn’t depend on (OOOO, they are such imbeciles, Kohler! how can they manage to breathe? they are such im-be-ciles!)—no, oh no . . . no, not on the fertility of invention, or the charm of an active fancy. It's nothing crude, Kohler, like a cock-ster’s skill. They are bumspittling lickhicks who think thus. And it’s not divine, no, not sent from some on-high like piss out a window—never—you know, like faith or grace or peace or purity or charity—they must have bald and pruny monks’ cods to think so—O no never. Then let’s be practical, shall we? Say we shall. Let’s come to earth; plant our feet; touch what’s real; let’s be—lets be-— concrete. And what is real in that way? right you are! only a warm blood-flooded prick. So say it's . . . wealth. Shall we be swiftly done, get right along, and simply say it's wealth? Hoo. Wealth. Wealth cannot purchase it, neither can beauty. Greatness, Kohler? Of course not. Not a feel-up, not a look-in, not a peek. No! Not if Midas’ pee were liquid gold, if Aphrodite split her cunt among the thieves or sold her bosom for the silver. Not if Jesus shat in the hand of God and buggered Nature at both poles. That doesn’t get it. Fawning, smirking, smiling, sniffing, fouling the mouth, dirtying the teeth, the tongue, the swallow-tube, the stomach next, not last nor least (when I go fast, Herr Kohler, as you see, I squeak), by going down on cunt, cock, dung hole, knee, for favor, when in heat, or out of courtesy . . . courtesy! ah, sunning in asslight till you tan—sweet summerlong vacations in the South—or otherwise to crawl, dart, sneak, or pander, be of use, oblige, and with the nose and ears to simper, playing rabbit to the snake, quail to the hunter—oh, to fake! to fake! and bravo with limp hands—or otherwise by grinning, or by clowning, fooling, fondling, cooing, oh, O, OH to scrape and scrape, to tip your head like a hat with a public handle, yes yes yess-ing like these cockhockkissing spermspitters always do, wagging, bowing, nig-gering and knaving, purring like a Yiddish cat: that THAT doesn’t doesn’t get it either. We were speaking of GREATNESS! Kohler ... oh ... it isn’t character or luck; it isn’t fate, clan, or family; though patience is part of it—persistence—
pride. Yes, yes, yes—yes, possibly . . . pride. But a man might as well fuck mud to fertilize an empire, or a woman lie with a battery between her thighs and hope to feel a little lightning in her belly—hah, god, just as useless, just as wise. Our Great Leader, the Thunder Fuhrer, you remember, could only get an Adam by some similar exercise. No . . . ach . . . Look at me, Kohler. I’ve the bones of a giant. I sing like a siren. I make intoxicating dreams. Then—then men listen. Enchanted, how they listen. Oh Kohler—greatness—greatness isn’t sensitivity or vision, Kohler—no—take it from me: GREATNESS IS PASSION!
We of the German nation
                                                                             so new to be a nation so new to be a self
                       How often did 1 hear that pompous introduction?
                  We of the Gem,, nation         ll8ht ™,se throu8h ‘h”ky
                                                                         like a swarm of flies
   As often as I heard ‘transcendent’ or read the word ‘pure’ in their works of philosophy?
   I gave up poetry for history in my youth. I gave up smoking; changed handwriting; traded stamps which I’d collected in my childhood for tables of mature statistics; seldom drank; was torn between the ethics of the Stoics and the ethics of Immanuel Kant; no longer moved to music; wrote out rules for my behavior and rigorously kept them, assigning grades; thought abstract thoughts and shrank from women; cultivated bibliographies in paper pots; lived in a house of heavy books. What led me once toward Germany—Holderlin and Rilke—remained pure imagery. Holderlin went mad. Rilke’s blood decayed. I gave up youth.
                                                                                          Hmfefjt
       0ldjtt for safe and aldjtt for certain                                          flltlj ringtO&tn
                                                                                          wltfon
German = now it is our turn.                               UtUteCijljelt tttlttflltttili         3j?Q! Ijcfl
tjcflen Ijeflet Ijefllg fjelllgtn Sjeflfgfttff Ijtfno*
If I do not write these absurd German words in that thorny German script, they sink into my English and lie hidden like a lot of lot of leucocytes poor Rilke unlidded, petaled finally epistles to the Fraus of princes, counts, and barons, those endlessly lettered and hyphenated ladies with their suitable chalets and villas, chateaus, castles, lodges, cottages, estates . . . and the engraved calling cards of the well-titled muses:
The calling cards which snowed the silver trays of the socially fortunate
                I cherish the memory of your castle rooms, the walks in the gardens, the charming view, the space 1 flew through when 1 flew out to my muse.
                      How often have I heard that pompous introduction?
Frau Gertrude Ouckama Knoop, Fraulein Imma von Ehrenfels, lisa Blumen-thal-Weiss, Frau Amman-Volkert, Frau L. Tonier-Funder, Ruth Sieber-Rilke, Ellen Key, Helene von Nostitz, Ellen Delp,
                Did these women live and grow in him? Were they his blood, or his disease?
   You could say, I suppose, that I died at an early age. But it is literature to say so, only emblematic; the idea’s faded—frayed and dented like a decorated pillow.
   But why should a rose be so remembered? Dandelions gray before they shatter; suit the life they stand for. Isn't emblem all there is to any flower?
                I begged to have the Countess to myself. We climbed the Mount Solaro.
Freifrau Anna Miinchhausen, Anni Mewes, Lili Schalk, Rosa Schobloch, Use Erdmann, Clara Rilke, Mimi Romanelli,
                  I hear every noise in my body, and 1 live among squabblers, we climbed
                The heaviness of the hangings—I remember them.
   Ausgesetzt auf den Bergen des Herzens. Rilke deprived himself of everything but solitude and poetry.
   In a state of Nature, Mad Meg said, if you and 1 are throttling one another, at least we have our reasons; there's nothing artificial about our fears; and then we have that terrible tension in our tentacles, eh?
   What love was as a word was so much more to him than love was as a feeling. Towers, bodies, you could only dwell in. What was "dwelling”?
   It’s l’homme to l’homme, you might say, Kohler, back in that imaginary country.
   I was torn between the Stoics and the ethics of Spinoza . . . changed my hand, altered every character into something German.
            (SjUxAj fasrrjL
   Though he declared that trees, birds, blossoms, buildings, patiently awaited seeing, he knew, too, that words, with greater urgency, claimed our devoted saying.
   But in a modern State, you don’t have to hate the man you’re murdering; that’s no longer necessary; orders are permissions, cancel pangs, promote remissions—don’t they? Read the Marquis, Kohler.
   Consider Heydrich, Tabor. Heydrich, the technician, who hated the men he murdered no more than the pistol hates the suicide who sucks its barrel. It’s a job: going IBAIM®!! Yes. Consider Heydrich, the technician, who loved the woman he screwed no more than the frigged prick loves its frigger. An act like eating, it represents a need, and satisfying that need is just a job: oh, ooh ooh aaah! o-o-h. Umm. Ausgesetzt... Outcast on the mountains of the heart . . . You don’t smoke? Like you, it makes me cough and stains the fingers—here—on the innersole of the index. Ah, Kohler, I have few pleasures now—my age, my illness.
   Listen, Herschel, I’m not wrong about Heydrich. He didn’t hate the Jews. He just loved his work.
   So I set down rules for my behavior, then like a soldier kept them, assigning grades and fixing to my narrow chest awards: blue green gold red silver stars in celebration and atonement of my cowed fidelity and fearful stamina until before me burst my Sunday self in light, opening the ahs of thousands.
   Octopi, Mad Meg would mutter. Scorpionfish.
   There’s no height to the hills of the heart, Rainer. No mountain flower or muscle grows there; slopes slide without rising, and joy is a downfall; there’s an end but never a start.
   Yes, it is eye who sees so; it is 1 who says so.
   Hobbes, yes—strange armada-stricken man—should have said we ought to give up all our feelings to the National Passion, artificial sovereign of the inner self, emotional Leviathan, for what are rights that anyone should care about them; what are merely outward powers? it’s what’s inside us that we count:
                                       123456789
   Out of the solitude of poetry, Rilke composed our loneliness. Hier bliiht wohl einiges auf; aus stummen Abstruz bliiht ein unwissendes Krautsingend hervor.
Seeds sing like lutes strollers played in past ages. Blood no one believes in blusters out a flower. But I know of no departures in fragrance. No victories iris their flags up in vases.
   A cannonball, once cannoned, the Great Jew said, may feel quite free within its own trajectory; it rises as we all do, then descends without agony or remorse or warning like a fool.
   Dirty habit, too—ashes over everything.
   Well, the rifle puts you at a stainless distance. At the same time, it permits a dangerous indifference, a lassitude toward duty, if it is not replaced by hatred at a higher level; thus we make an image of our enemy; or rather, Kohler, it’s our enemy we make; otherwise our soldier loses heart.
   History has no truck with either loneliness or poetry, so out of loneliness I chose it, became intimate with multitudes, and studied time and distance with Mad Meg.
   Myth murdering myth: that’s war these days.
   Aber ungeborgen, hier auf den Bergen des Herzens ...
   Pretty Epictetus: we should live each day as one who goes in fear of ambush. The Old Jew knew—see how he fooled us? When we replace our passions with ideas, it’s true, we no longer live in a human bondage.
   I signed my name another way, improved my spelling, gave up dancing. Kohler, not even a pipe is allowed me now. My age. My illness.
   Kohler! don’t go to doctors, Kohler—ever. They save your life by saying no.
                                       in here it is dark
Frau Julie Weinmann, Frau Hanna Wolff, Sofia Nikolaevna Schill, Lisa Heise, Lotti von Wedel, Inga Junghanns,
                                 oh reiner Widerspruch
                          Why should a rose be so remembered?
                    No flowers, Madame, I entreat you, their presence excites the demons which fill the room.
  Was it wise for all these titled husbands to indulge their wives with poets?
                                CASTLE CAVALCANTI
      SARAZANA
                                           /.   /.    1300
      l //^! dear, /llandetta :
        lohaAiyefe>r the bade ofechamye ino chanye, loounteM; do not leave me (Lou, love, do not leave), few yurillfindyou* baeh-yround'i only mevuny dice a itandony train; you#- aye itbelfewill aye, thiyhb thiclcen, eye& dim, damlmy, earn wame, hairyray,; you* life and window lyyou; you will bee pale feaceh merely out there deep in mayaxmei and anadoui thouyhti ofe bomeuthere they vrnayme (hey ame yoiny,yubt ab you imayine all the latent feabhionb on you, piaye by puye, while you travel towcurd a town or country loner who will want you otherwiie, completely clotheblebb, not a coverlet between your dona, the bottom ofe your Ireabtb (juite loobe ly (hob time, teeth aferaid, your whole body hanyiny by a thread (he will not mind, my dear, my Lou, death swallows like a dog, indifferently, whatever mouthful); btill, fe you btay with me, dear lady, we bhall confetne our yroiviny to
one place. and put eternal beauty in us, exchange our tired flesh for language, live anew in letters read and written daily just as long as passion lasts; not alone in us, but as it lingers on continually in man as worsening diseases do (they, Lou, always have a bed); and all those lives they have persuaded to the grave make them, instead, immune; make them, like love, almost abstract, almost-- so safely do they step from death to death--immortal. Admittedly (my Lou) this argument is shaky; so is the wire we walk, dear lady; yet there's no drop that ends in breaking if we fail to cross, no chance worth greater taking than this gulf we span in every line of poetry. Countess, Countess...dearest Madame...we're replacing our two lives with verse; it is our soul, like Socratesl, we're shaping. Where's the loss? Does it swim in the wine of your lover's mouth like a stupored fish? Such a tongue I'd never trust. Or do you like your heart reverberating in another's chest? Echoes, my Mandetta, merely...second sounds. Or is i loving eyes that lay a beauty on you like a curse which make you yearn and dream...and tumble; for who can live so--placed as high and perilous as that? Perhaps it's simply coming to a pitch and pouring forth in privated quaking every physical possession; perhaps it's simply those insane convulsions in lovemaking, Madame (from sensations found that fully only in sensation), when the prisoned inner body, as a slate of total feeling, finally flowers out. (The violet, dear Lou, contains the purest burning, heat men say.) Ah, in that case, Countess, really, what's the loss? that?
                                    that’s what I could say
   This book is intended to make you a mountain. From such a mountain you
may see
                                          dead jews
   Now I know it has destroyed me
                                 thousands of days’ dedication to death on the printed page
And 1 have been the helpless butt of filthy jokes, the face in the hole at the fun house, the bull’s-eye on the dartboard, the court dwarf.
                              from such a mountain you may see Mad Meg’s pucky face
   Bill, are you still making book on the Boche? Governali carries his head on a plate down the hallway. Day after day. The same songs. The same singing. Culp’s next door. Dear god. Culp.
                 0 the dirty Hun has all the fun ...
                 The Frenchman thrives on neglected wives...
   He sings.
   And Herschel lives across the hall, haunts his office like a hapless spirit, his gray bulk a gray bulk behind the glass.
   I gave up poetry for history in my youth.
         Why?
   (i) 1 gave up youth.
         Why did you give up youth?
      (a) I was no good at it. Have your youth later, I said, when you are better equipped . . .
         Poetry stood for order, rule, and regulation, didn’t it?
             Not in my mind.
         -i- It represented riot and wilderness and inner regard.
         -ii- It represented fire, war, wonderment, and faithful dedication.
         -iii- It stood for what might, what could, what would, what should essentially Be. It was written as if from the future. It saved with praise whatever was passing, while history hurried it along, and lowered life into its grave with solemn pontification. An event enters history because it is over; dead, it is buried in blame like a pigeon in its own shit or a gull in its guano. It should be clear—plain to any person—open to any eye—that historical chronicles are chronologies of crime, and that any recital of the past constitutes an indictment.
   You appear to hate history.
   I love History because I hate Time and all Time contains. I gloat on its going. I perform the Himmler Fling. 1 jig on the graves of all those days: July 6, 1415, for instance, when they burned John Hus; or Dec. 7, 43 b.c., a day on which Anthony’s thugs murdered Cicero; or July 21, 1946, when President Gualberto Villarroel was hung from a lamppost, like the symbol of a pawnshop, with three globes; or Jan. 29, 1938, when the elevator took my mother to the floor reserved for the crazy ladies.
   What are you going to call it, Bill: Apologia pro devita jua?
   That's Oscar. Os. Oscar Planmantee.
   From the peak of my book death stretches away like a valley crossed with lazy streams.
   And I have this tension in my testicles, this pressure in my groin.
   Your history is your only individuality, says Oscar Planmantee. His glasses dangle from a string around his neck,
   You must understand, Kohler, Herr Behlen said, that we Germans have an immense sympathy for mountains. We did not destroy a single mountain during the whole war.
           Life in a chair
          Beyond my book the machines are still mowing. 1 must ask about Herr Tabor. When Mad Meg died, I followed his coffin to the grave. 1 must ask, though I’m afraid. A nightmare woke me early, the great mound of my wife bulked beside me, the undrawn curtains like a fog across the windows, and the light pale where it puddled on the carpet. A soothsayer: that’s what I need, someone to read the creases of the sheet, the design in the shadows, my entrails, dreams. I was about to fall from a great height into the sea, and I was wondering how I might contrive to strike the water so as to cancel consciousness completely, if not to die away at once like a friendship or a humiliated penis. Memory. Martha: she was once a maiden. Just imagine. Memory. Mine is fragile . . . fragile . . . only paper; my sanity, film thin. I am not a dreaming man . . . not normally. Daylight dreams, of course, consume me, but generally I fall asleep the way a peach is eaten. Between my eagerly approaching jaws there’s not a squirt of feeling. Martha. Maiden. Just imagine. The eyes at the end of my teeth suck nothing seen. Her thighs as a child are slim, her face is rosy. I was once a slim boy, too. No. I was fat as a baby, fat as a boy, fat as a balloon, cub scout, school bus, hall monitor, frat pledge, army major. Fat as. Fat, I fall asleep. It is an ancient ambiguity (friend or enemy?): this slowing to a stop of all sensation. Torpid, I lie like a length of digesting snake or a long unillustrated book. In my dream I am hung in the sky like a dangle. Something flashes from me, streams away. The sea is the color of slate and rough as a roof, yet it seems to roll up the side of the sky as if I were looking at it through a bowl, perhaps as a fish does, which is puzzling because my perch is that of a bird. I decide to fall spread-eagle. In my dream 1 dream of drowning; that is, I consider it; I imagine drowning, think ahead, project; and the terror of it wakes me. It’s as if I were back in the army and my fall were a part of my duty. Odd. My wife is somewhere, and my children. I sense their presence indirectly: a whir of wheels behind me on a highway. The height is frightening, the trial falls are also awful—the rush of wind is very real—but the envisioned smother of the water: it is horrible. The sea—the sea as I sink is like gray porch paint, thick as treacle. This is a rehearsal, I know, but next time I shall open, swallow. The whole ocean will spill into me, drum like rain on the bottom of my belly. I decide to fall spread-eagle.
          To dream of drowning: that’s old hat.
        I woke with a sense of having been warned, the flesh of my wife piled beside me, curtains glassy, light stale, a single shoe in the middle of the room like a ship at sea. I went downstairs, distracted, like a king in Israel, as if in search of a soothsayer. Often when I've dreamed, though I dream rarely, I’ve dreamed I
       leaped from dream to dream as fancy lets me skip sometimes through books: as goats do crags, they say, boots leagues, clouds peaks. They’ve been dreams in which a sleeper who is dreaming dreams still further dreams (and that’s old stuff, old stuff indeed), like doors receding down a corridor, until he reaches one in which the sleeper is awake—stiff, staring, hair on end—awake in a room full of fleshy mist and ships like lonely shoes; dream rooms opening through translucent doors to terraces where one might view along the lineless edge of a crystal cliff the eternally fresh rise of Reality—-a plenum circulous with shit—just as, with his customary metaphysical clarity, Parmenides did (old hat upon old hat): each dream in the shape a stone that’s pelted into water takes, multiplying always from the inside so that the first sleeper reached is the last one dreamed— another Eleatic irony—because even after the original knot of night-thought has obdurately passed beyond the bottom by penetrating silt, its farewells persist in fainter and fainter prints, in wider and wider widening rings.
                      it was like falling into the sea to pass that open door a wind like cold water space a cold glass flights of fish surprise my nose my ah! breath goes f a s s s t
                    and all this has happened before The relentless regress: just how old-hat is that?
         I wonder what the warning was. My memory is delicate, obscene. Mad Meg in the Maelstrom: shouting through the jostle, yelling at a shoulder, addressing a chest, demonstrating handholds, grips on history. Susu’s slit is long and thin, as she is (a shameful same), and lined with red like a bloodshot eye, eyebrows on either side (so the photos show it), as if quizzically raised. From Mad Meg a spray of speech, a spray of spit. Imbecile. Yes. The story was too good to keep.
  Yet I remember protesting. I protested. I did not idly acquiesce. Yes. The marble tries to gleam, but shadows fall on shadows there like played cards. Meg cannot gesture freely even as an image on the floor. And above him, where his voice has risen, there is an equally obliterating babble. When I grumble about my work, Martha moves in, smiles across the breakfast table, wags the spoon she’ll use to stir her coffee, ungut her grapefruit. How I hate that imperious gesture. Intemperately, Tabor reiterates, tries to make himself heard. The spoon which wags will, in a moment, stir. The light that was glowing in its bowl floats on the surface of her coffee now like cream. And 1 re-create him, including his ear fur, the hair on his hands. You really don’t want to finish that Big Brutish Book, Wilfred. What would you do then? What would you do? You’d be a knitter without wool; you’d be a hotel with a left-out lobby. Martha’s mind has this habit of incessant example: first a horseless rider (easy), then an Easterless bunny, a Mellon without money. You don’t want to—for fear of—fear of finish, Wilfred. What would you do? You don’t have a hobby. You hate to teach school—your students pester, annoy, and bore you—so the only work for which you’re paid turns out to be workless. ([Is Billy supposed to admire this pun? Well, Billy don't.]) You have refused friends, my help, the advice of your sons. ([{The advice of my sons!}]) You won’t do anything but dub around the house. Will you trim shrubs, grow flowers, comb the cat? I don’t blame you for holding back. You’re simply afraid of retirement, of living in a vacant lot, behind a billboard ([and Billy, as bored by all this as the buffalo on a worn-off nickel, is supposed to admire the pun; well, Billy don’t]), in some weedy, windy, empty place. Muffin crumbs have made my saucer unsafe, the butter tweedy. Martha’s face is full of freshly scrubbed blood. The wall is acrawl with paper vines. I wonder would one of them hold me. Martha’s crack, in contradistinction to, is now so wide the nut’s milk is seeping. Imp without evil, she smugly suggests, that’s what you'd be. Dispitched, my fork simmers in a broken egg. I’m not allowed to lick my knife. So let me mow the snow on the weekends, Daddy, for a dime. I lift my fork to salute the devil which I serve. My dear Martha, I had a paper route. And a change maker fastened to my belt. My dear Martha, I say with a syrupy lilt (although I allow my fork to clatter), my dear Martha, grow—flow— flourish. I used to let the nickels drop. Snick snick two pennies snick a nickel snick a dime. My dear. Longer ago than that, it seems, 1 looked on your face with fascination. Now I see in you what you see in me. The quarter: I never had too many of those. Snick a penny. I do the dishes in this house and so I care about the cleanliness of tines. I also put the pitchfork in the earth. I hoe. I rake. You cut. You trim. You train. You snick. 1 clear away the vines. The good old days. I wonder would one of them hold me. Click. Smick. The once fine times. I sold the Journal door to door. Liberty. The American magazine. My dear, you already
       fill each tiny crawl and cranny of my life as though you were sweetly reconditioned air. Her rich lips quiver slightly. It’s a little late to pay attention to the kids, but you might at least learn to drive the car. (As if 1 didn’t know how to drive a car.) I remember protesting that there were too many Jews. Ah, Kohler— Tabor touches his trousers—there are too many Hindoos. Birth has always been the bane of bodily existence. And here I am entering fifty as though it were the outskirts of Moline. I lift my fork in salute but observe it covered with yolk. Still, there are so many things 1 might in my general lateness learn: how to wiggle my middle finger on the sounding string. 1 would pedal my bike over half the town trying to collect. My customers were crooks. With my past safely past me, I could scale mountainous sums to look on numbers formerly beyond expression. All those free reads, though. In the American a feature-length mystery every month. I’d like to learn to weave rugs whose mystical designs would snare the shoe. So many magics remain, my dear; there is so much to feel and see and do—to move and shake—accomplish and perform—there is always a forelock left by which to take Time; and where simple things have gone quite plainly wrong, there is the opportunity to make long, incomprehensible repairs. Our breakfast cloth is sticky with honey rings. 1 stroll my eyes like a pair of poodles from pale blue square to square until I reach the milk. She knows that I’ll drink nothing held in place by cardboard ballyhoo and boozle wax, but she carries carton after carton in the house
                             as if our kids were still kids and lived with us like pampered eats ate graham crackers after school, licked jelly off of jellied fingers, and wore mustaches made of milk
        to sour slowly in the fridge and slip like vomit down the sink. Left hand in her lap ... I reach the precipice ... is she wearing hers, or am I to infer that a restless and rebellious soul struts and frets behind the curtain of her flesh this morning? When she’s fed up with cooking for me she will leave her rings in a clutter by the stove, together on her bedside table as a warning not to touch, or on the lid of a can of scouring powder so to say, “I shall not scrub," and when she does her face she drops them in a dish of slid-out soap because she’d forsake her mirrored visage too, the girlish blond plumpness gone, the long braids gray. The diaphragm she inserted last night in a spirit of pure speculation (1 smelled the jelly on her fingers as her torso turned like a roll of snow from the center of our marriage to the bed’s left edge)—has it been removed? Likewise, the first furnace this house had is still in dust and ash down there, left over, abandoned in a corner of the cellar
                                     like
                                     a stack of old mags
                                     like a hollow paper octopus,
                                     paper because the asbestos wrapping
                                     like a thought that’s consumed
                                     its subject resembles
                                     paper
                                                                                when it isn't
                                     wound to resemble a
                                                                                                          dirty bandage or a
   mummy’s slumber suit. The stairs creak as 1 descend to show Mad Meg around. The walls slope as his shoulders did, though his were dry and brittle in the bone, shivering slightly as his palsy overtook him: tortoise to the hare. Little do you know, dearie, what I do, what I have done, all that I’ve concealed from view like that condom at the bottom of my dresser’s bottom drawer (the sentimental hope of my old age), hidden by the hankie I’ve usually spilled my sperm in (and she says I have no hobby), and which she’s innocently, ignorantly washed so many times without ever realizing she was laundering her rival: a square of linen delicately laced at every edge with leaves and tendrils, blooms and bees, designed to make snot social. The cellar’s moist cool air is somehow soothing, the old stones contribute to an atmosphere of adolescent mystery—Dumas pere.
     The burgeoning of her body even then, the delicious dents her girdle left, like the faint depression where a shadow’s slept, seemed to signify a generous and overflowing nature, for hers was flesh which rose to meet you like a man’s. I misread that feature as I did so many others. My wife grew more evident only in order to disappear. She was brightly stickered, richly wrapped and gaily ribboned, happily festive and tissuey; but open, the promising package looked empty, and if there’d been a jewel in the box, it had slipped beneath its velvet cushion. No question she seemed highnessy, with her regal chest, piled hair—a formidable Wilhelmina. Had I displeased the queen? She kept me so far from the capital there was never any news—flab saw to that—and when 1 stroked or struck her I was nowhere near a nerve. Under the spell of private urgency, how foolish I was to exclaim: I love what poops beyond your underclothes; or give myself so freely
       away with some coarse lover’s uncouth praise: you have boobs for a bottom, baby, you are nothing but tit. I ought to have been alerted by no less insistent a signal than her speech itself, since hers invariably held warnings, not warmth; it promised pain, not pleasure; it pinned disapproval blindly to you like a donkey s
       tail, not commendation with its doubled kisses like the croix de guerre; and if my compliments were phrased in smelly cabbage and meatpie prose, always steamy and direct (though plainly I admired the poetry of the double-O), her castigations, her complaints, her commands, weren’t one verb better, merely a number of lame nags longer: Koh, you lethargic shit, you forgot to pay the bloody monthlies, she would say, our gas will go, you uncomic clown, the taps wheeze, lights dim, trash grow, jesus, no one will phone, water will weaken our whiskey, milk
       skim, and who will plop the paper on the porch, Koh, eh? who will deliver my dress? She would curse me out and call me down and rip me up as though we were still in bed, but I must admit she was never a very dedicated bitch. Lazy at that too. Codfishy caze. Yes, my dear Martha is stubbornly desultory about everything except the snuffle-up of origins, the pull-out of roots—whatever, in German, would be prehxed with ur. Skeletons, sinisters, stains on scutcheons, family spooks, cowbirdy malfeasance, mesalliances, cuckoos in elegantly cabineted grandfather clocks, black sheep, ugly ducks, adulterations, and dirty down-and-below-stairs doings, Romanian romances, French fucks, all mulatto offspring, fatal inheritance, squandered dowries, poisoned genes: they still stir her like a swizzle. She’s always wanted to be more than a prick pasture or a tongue towel, and thought that her ancestors would provide her with a self. Skinflinty cooze. Be sure to put a spade in that garden, Whiffle, before you finger me again. Touch that puddymuddy, Marty? I'd rather jar worms. There was a gaiety in the way she put her grievances which snipped their effects as surely as a cry for help composed in hexameters is scissored of its urgency no matter what it says. I no longer know why she’s such a snout about the past. Reliable as a truffle pig though, the faithless squint. Well, we're never guilty of these hokey-jokey vituperations now. We seldom argue, seldom shout. Not since our beds parted and grew their own rooms. However, our insults remain ornate though more rarely delivered—why not?—we’ve the remainder of our lives for their construction.
         The lingo of our early years together . . . well, we were so proper, so strength and health—unsturm, undrang—and 1 was a young professor with as much real dignity as a dimpled knee . . . consequently, 1 think we felt the need to be a little dirty, a little vulgar in our privacy. Behind doors, beneath covers, William Frederick Kohler became Wilfred Koh, Whiff Cough, sometimes—Marty was Mule— while we both called my cock Herr Ricklerwhen it rose. Outrages, body counts, retaliations, sadistic ins and outs, the sexual deviations which I calculated as you’d calibrate and table all the temptations to a compass of nearby metal and the far-off pole, all the meek statistics of my enterprise: they fell easily under the head of
   the Great Judaic Joke—GGJ, we said in code—tee hebe hee—and it seemed to work. I think my mind was fairly clean then. We had our humorous sense in hand and were able to cackle at all the classically funny ones: how in the camps, as Goe-ring told it, the prisoners had grown so hungry they now gnawed the paper from the walls to get the glue, sliced their belts for bacon, fried the thin soles of their shoes, and then began on one another. Amusing enough, the Reichsmarschall said, but also serious, because in one place they had also sauteed a German sentry, beginning with his balls. Yes, those were the good old obscene days. I taught Mule the difference between Gesamtlosung and Entlosung so well she would propose a total solution to the cockroach or the Kleenex question as readily as I might suggest a suitable final solution for the dogs and children of our neighbors, and she has never forgiven me for that contamination. Well, I kept my head. When she wanted the yard mowed or a loaf in her oven, I accused her of planning my elimination by “natural diminution." She knew it wasn’t entirely a tease. Here comes Herr Rickler once again, we said. She called herself the Bill Collector. And I protested. Those Hebrews taught me how to be a bigot—yes—but I got over it. We do. We get over everything—the good old obscene days. Aufgehoben. Ja. We transcend. Although crippled from childhood by wealth and kindness, eventually we conquer our natural inclinations to reach the impoverished safety of the callous. There are even moments in our present life together when I don’t dislike her. Amazing. Consider how hard it is to hate—persistently, continuously—how hard. Injuries heal; the cause can be forgotten; the point dulled; the yield mistaken; the profit lost. People generally parade their strengths, and Martha is as regimentally fat as a line of march. What is there left to discover by living next to next (her deaf ear, my mealy mouth, her cold crotch and my remorseless mind, her full soft breasts, my small stiff cock)—to acquire and collect—but emotional pox and moral smegma? Nevertheless, in spite of our spats, I really know her the only way I know the Congo—through pictures taken mainly from the air. That’s really what she is: a great ungainly volume of travel photos. Even naked—stretching—about to floor her fingers—she looks like a native squatting in the weeds. Considering our present condition, our persistent penalization of one another, our jokey defensiveness and intermittent meetings, the dismantled community of our common life, well, it strongly resembles these mishmashed pages, my refusal to come to grips with my subject, in fact, my chaotic lack of focus, my nervous dithering— oh yes, I recognize it, my postponement of ultimates, my pileup of periods, my refusal of denouements, those moments when I find myself filling an entire page with one pronoun: my my my my my my my my my admittedly rather fetching when softly sounded my my my not an expression of mild surprise or disapproval but my my my my my not of grief but of bountiful possession my my my or doodling or designing flags or making up limericks my my my my my my as if whatever prompted me to write was important, when, of course, the opposite is the
         case, no one, nothing, not even I, need these words, not one more T 'my’ or ‘me,’ either, or another disquisition on the many off-rhymes of life no no no nevertheless 1 have an increasing hunch that I’ll want to have a private page to hide between each public page of G & 1 to serve as their insides, not the tip but the interior of the iceberg, so to speak, why? why? why? beyond that I couldn’t say except that 1 feel a chill a chill a chill just my height, distinct, mine, my body’s width wide, drafting toward me from every side, as if 1 were about to slide into a long sorrow and blue surround of ice. To be morgued there through centuries. And only my inside sorrow still alive. My women
                                                    I
                                           say
                                         mine to
                                   hide the stubborn fact, the acrid irony, the unpalatable point, the mournful and the bitter truth, that they indeed are mine, and I must consequently face and feel and fuck, own up—my god—own up, own up, own up to them. My women belong to my faculties, each to a separate specialty:
                                 Marty to perception, to “being there” with such insistence, such aplomb, even Martin (Marty) Heidegger could not explain her solid presence to me; then Rue belongs to a bully's lust, and phallic pride, Plato’s low soul;
                               and Lou to goowallowy romance and tender feeling, while Susu’s impressive but imagined slit grips my reason till its fixed, cold, callous concepts gasp against their will and come. (One ball always hangs a little lower than the other.)
   LOOK! I have Martha by the playful throat. I am persuading her to follow me, enter my operations, become a criminal as 1 have. THINK! I command like a public placard. I want you to think. Return to the time where I am. Get out of this insipid Indiana town and fly to Germany where murder is the muse. I want you to imagine, thoroughly envision, precisely picture, clearly see. I want you to see—are you looking through your fingers like a fence?—I want you to see a Jew’s cock—hatless, raw-headed, red as an alcoholic’s nose—rise. Any Jew’s will do. They are famously the same. Call one up. You get the joke? Well, laugh then, so I’ll know. Consider the wrinkled daddy-dinkums that you’ve made. Feeling qualmish? I want you to watch it while it slowly swells, twitches throughout its formerly flaccid length as though a little link of sausage were alive. I want you to watch closely while it shivers from a hairy thigh and lifts, enlarging as it goes, straightening, becoming stiff as a pole for the German flag, but bearing another banner, oh yes . . . and so . . .
                               sickening the swollen veins, the kosher crown, the sticky bead like sweat that rises to its tip like bullet grease to lubricate the dome . . .
   ah, is it not—this image—hideous and tummy turning?
   ... oh yes, but why?
   . . . because it means more Jews. I hiss this last in my snakiest tongue, looped as I am on a lower branch, but Marty gags rhetorically. So? she says, so? so? Anyway, you’re describing your own sweet weenie, Willie. That careless slander called for an outraged outcry: 1 don’t require a forged foreskin! I have my own passport to purity! I tell her there is nothing essentially Semitic about me. I do two things Jews never do: drink and go down. That shuts her up. How can she answer an unfinished fact? The naked truth is the best lie. Ask the Dukhobors. And anyone is a Jew who believes to his caca-kosher bottom two things. Like Winston I V my fingers. Two things: clannish allegiance and the letter of the Law. 1 crook my V into a hammer’s claw. Two things: blood and ambition. I pull a nail from the wrist of Our Saviour. Two things: money and the mind.
   The muses do not look below the moon, nor we, now, much above it, but there may be fallen angels of artistic bent and interest who might hearken if we cried out in the right direction, briskly beat upon the plumbing till, from some deep distance, tunes returned, and we could rhyme again, or at least curse with relish and a remnant of conviction. There must be muses of malfeasance and misuse who bring on our vulgar verses like a sickness, inspire our musicals and movie scripts, our lying adverts and political bios, thundering the tongue about in its mouth like a storm on the stage. Yes . . . dwelling in our sewers and our dumps, squalid divinities surely remain to encourage the prof-
anation of the absent gods. There have got to be a few to celebrate the abuse of the spirit in its sweet fat flesh; who teach schoolboys how to masturbate; who are the divinities of daydream, and excite in reverie what reality can no longer claim (for what stirred Pietro Aretino into song? not Erato or anyone from Helicon). Given the copycolor concepts of our time, we can be confident that there are still some agents of inverted inspiration left, demons of exhalation, dullness, torpor, cliche, titillation, stench, whose noxious farts become the genius of our clay, and, with that backward breath, disanimate it slowly, just about the way you might let mildew strike a tent.
   Ink has stained my fingers for so many years, I take the color to be normal as my flesh, and the callus where my pen has rested is of no more moment than a corn. Even the points and prints 1 sometimes leave upon the page no longer look like a labyrinth where the very identity its pattern is supposed to guarantee in fact threatens to lose me in its aimless turns and tangled threads. Nevertheless, each smudge makes a mysterious and magical map, and if I let my mind be dizzied by its designs, I may suddenly find I’ve pierced the paper like a sharpened nib. So:
                     I walk into the day upon a path which cowplop has endangered. Water stands below the weed tops and lets the light spread like a swamp. The grass is brown, and the scorched crowns of the trees warn off the birds, ice lies in liquid sheaths around the trunks. That’s beauty for you, and it’s through such cracks I slip into the world of real remembrance where events are recomposed to please me.
So:
                   My words swan the page as I recall, in England, waiting to invade, how I once saw that stately bird coast across the middle of a meadow as if the creature had turned the land into a lake or I was seeing a mirage. I approached, and in a moment saw the sunken watercourse she floated on as silently as a barrage balloon, carried by secret currents and the concealed intention of her webs. As ungainly on the ground as I am in my flesh, she knew how, in her element, to compose herself, and her sudden calm white silhouette let my heart leap up as though its shoulders had been pinned by bullies an entire life before. She was a song.
         But feares are now my pheares, greife my delight. . .
  Crashaw, for instance. Hugo von Hofmannsthal. Bunin. Pnin. Pope. I began my book in love and need; shall I finish in fear and trembling? Open any. Melville. Pater. Eliot. Ford. The mouth of Moloch has a lovely flicker: it’s like a butterfly against the darkened trunks of bathing pines—that flicker. Perhaps a distant tongue of flame. Step into a page—mind the give—and pray for safe crossing. This craft is like the bark of Virgil. The raft of Medusa, 1 think, Os says. The bark of Fido, Culp cackles. The swan boat. . . The . . . Although the muscles of the larynx labor ceaselessly, the consequence is quiet, a pronunciation so exact it utters nothing. I can’t complain. Not all of us can be Ben Jon-son or Jane Eyre—the most beautiful name of all—and it was one line of Ben’s which made me give up poetry for history in my youth. Bad books are made from noble sentiments, Gide said. If so, G & / should be a lulu—not a noble sentiment in sight. Why hold back? I gave up noble sentiments for truth. Perhaps my long German book was an exterior, a fasade, for which I am now constructing an inside, un livre interieur, as Proust put it, but from my point of view he had things backward, didn’t he? because in le moi -profond there was a richness of revelation emerging from the muck (as the family bog yields Martha bones), which rescued the impoverished and aimless and dirty social surface; there was operating under the slack and patchy skin of things (to alter the image) a fully articulated anatomy, the way waves dance wildly to the tune of lawful forces (to maneuver the metaphor); while if this “book” were to be the bottom one, it would not even stand (or remain, I suppose 1 should say) as the skull’s grin beneath beauty’s ripe red lips (to return to an earlier notion), but rot as a core of rot within, mud and wind and black night at work like a witch behind the serene and reasoned clarity of day (to shift the perspective). Hold back. It’s hard. Some writers rope themselves up peaks, some motorcar, some bike, some dive. Cavafy. Durkheim. Gertrude Stein. Every terror has its own terminology, and I am used to terror... to Cervantes ... in my life in a chair. Tolstoy. Trollope. Kepler. Mann. When your Milton invoked the Muses, Mad Meg said, gesturing toward his library with an arrogapt flick of his hand—it had the snobby flutter of a courtier’s hankie—this—this is what he meant. I went hunting in my head for that beginning. Think how he wrote, the Meg insisted, bending with the weight of the word. THINK! Not life. The lamp . . . The lamp. The language.
         Ha’ you felt the wooll of Bever?
                 Or Swans Downe ever?
  And if one had written just those two lines in a life, though living like a rat in a sewer, would the misery not be worth it? not ever?
   Who is it? Is it Mr. Mallory? the prisoner? or Raleigh? Condorcet? Who thus constricts my chest? . . . Confucius? that old chink? Livy then? Gibbon? O la! Tacitus? Gilgamesh. How many times have I fallen inside a sentence while running from a word? Winckelmann. Kafka. Kleist. You would not believe that long bodiless climb from Descartes to Leibniz. Lewis. Lemuel Gulliver. Catullus. Gogol. Constant. Sterne. 1 live on a ledge—a sill—of type—a brink. Here. Pascal. Alone. Among the silences inside my books . . . Frege, Wittgenstein . . . within the rhythms of reason . . . the withheld breath, the algebra of alliteration, the freedom of design . . . Dryden, Zeno, Stevens, Keats . . . the perpetual hush, blood in the penis, the deductions of rhyme . . . Here. James and James and James the Joyce: a firm of marriage brokers. Charmes. At the quick edge of space. In The Faerie Queen. In “Jabberwocky.” In the slow mind of time.
   Mater Matuta, I beg you, let me come out alive.
WE HAVE NOT LIVED The town I was bom in was
made by a crossing of tracks. A rare and momentous event, this intersection, for those two tracks had passed over mile after mile of prairie as if the earth they lay on were space through which they were falling—two lives, two histories, two kinds of loneliness—with no idea they were converging, and must cross; yet in the moment of their meeting they were silent, for what did they compose then but an illiterate’s X? So my town did not have the shape of a string stretched briefly beside a track as so many did, in imitation of their makers; it was little and round, swelling slowly in the arms of its X, filling out a pie already cut in four pieces; and the portion with the trees was served with economic ceremony to the rich. The town called itself Grand—not Grand Crossing or Grand Junction, not Grand Union or Grand Meeting or Grand Chance—simply Grand, and the grand trees there, also an accident, shaded the roofs of the mighty. The citizens put in a few, of course, and over the years some grew respectably large, but mostly the wind blew, and the sun fell—molten—to run in the streets. One lived all summer through the burning of Pompeii, and during the dust bowl years that substance billowed like ash through the town, sliding beside fences in loose coils, streaming along walls, and drifting onto porches, into stables, exposed shops.
THE RIGHT LIFE
                  Night. Joked no one. Sat silent at the dinner table, forking in rage, not pie or potatoes; the children marshaled round me; Carl’s lip swelling where I’d struck him; my wife, for a change, like a smiling Buddha. Wrong. Tis below you. ’Tis bad habit.
                No more of it.
   Atoms, motion, and the void, Democritus has written, are the three imperishable things.
   Dust comes in three kinds, I remember. Some of it is soft and even smeary like rouge; some is hard and glassy like sand; and some is like the crust of an exploded pie, when the land lifts off in layers, in sheets and flakes (shit in a fan is far too moist, snow too cold, too transient, hail too large). All three kinds came. They silted up in slow corners, devising little dunes in vacant lots, piling everywhere the snow did during winter—the wind picturing itself in lines like those which waves draw, draining from the beach. Paint was scoured cruelly from buildings, naked metal burnished, windows scratched. Such storms were really hard to believe in; it was as though thunderheads had become substantial, as if the earth were inexplicably sky, grain after grain of it raining away into space. Dawn appeared as a vulgar announcement, an ad for a frightening movie (while Time was measured out in downspouts), and sunsets were displayed in the deepest colors of catastrophe, the dark discordant tones of the Last Trump.
                  In this old house we’ve misfitting screens. Tiny insects are dying of my lamps. One dances in the ash tray as though in a frenzy of rage. How they thrash and buzz and batter themselves. I think there are no further times of year. To express an agony like that I should have to crash against the bedroom wall. Spin down in flames like an ace of the First War. Roll, to save myself from burning, in a rug. They write Os in the air, perfect Os, as I was taught. I seldom sweat, you know— surprising in a fat man. Now put my smoking out.
   Democritus traveled to Babylon in order to pry secrets from the Chaldean Magi; he sojourned in Egypt and stole from the priests; he went to Aethiopia and also visited Athens to pester Socrates who wouldn’t see him; he even rode an ass to India to prod the Naked Sages with his unprincipled curiosity. None of them told him what he needed to know, namely that atoms differed in three ways: in shape, arrangement, and position; that is to say: in rhythm, touching, and in turning. Though obliged to live poorly, he figured this out for himself. It was another Democritus who wrote On the Jews and those two books about tactics.
                Crow—0 crow— don't cross my path, so my life lasts a little longer.
   My study smokes like a singsong cellar. All such places arealike. It must be the books which make it seem crowded. Where is the band? I used to sit alone in a fold of the room, at a small square table, dunced, one tip touching, soliciting, my stomach, my stein of beer at the prow, my elbows riding the other corners when I hunched, and I hunched often, pursuing unfamiliar shoes across the floor, and the tracks of angrily shoved stools. I came to hear skinny Susu sing in her low, throaty Sprechstimme, which was nevertheless French, a song about the carrion crow. It had innumerable verses and she never sang them all. How her voice reached me through the noise and bulk of those bodies, belly to belly like the bottles on the bar, was a mystery belonging more to magic than to science. Her sounds were hesitant, shy, as though regretting they had come, and hardly strong as the waitresses who, dressed in costumes purportedly Bavarian, elbowed everyone aside to slop down drinks. Perhaps it was drawn to me as sucking insects are, and became devious. Certainly that song was thirsty for my blood, and I never really heard any other. Perhaps I shouldn’t smoke so much. Perhaps the roses will freeze. In the camps a cigarette was often hard to come by. We often smoked together, you and I, toes exquisitely touching, once at the hips, again at the elbows, the smoke going off toward the ceiling in a lazy curl the way our bodies seemed to bum off after loving. I’ve one window, like the Cyclops—facing east—and a cold pink purely decorative sun is rising over the snow now; a freezing fog has dampened its blaze and made it rounder than the moon gets. The pond smokes and I worry about the roses, wrapped in straw and twine like shocked wheat. So there was something special about that song; it was attracted to me, trapped there in my little corner between indifferently squeezing walls. Crow—O crow—don't cross my path . . . How much of the breath that’s been allotted to me have I breathed in this chair? . . . so my life lasts a little longer. Susu would sing it once every evening; she would sing it with blank black doll’s eyes and a fixed sad smile she wore the way she wore her clothing—absently—scarcely moving her mouth. Her dresses were cut in a deep V like the style you see in Lautrec’s posters of Yvette Guilbert. Sometimes yellow, mostly green, they were stretched so tight across her boyish braless chest, the nipples leaped out from the fabric like bumps on pebbled water. The song could have come from her eyes just as well. They never blinked. I had a passion for that woman. Immense. Now I can’t bear to have a table touch me. In this house I avoid chairs with arms, and sit in the middle of couches—and then only on the yielding edge. I am impressed by what the world will swallow. Mouths, too, I must confess, no longer please me. A friend of my
mother’s could not sleep near cats because he feared they would suck his breath. Culp, my colleague, Culp sings too—his little rhymes—invents tunes for his lim-erickal history of the human race. He has an infinite number about nuns, each with the same first line. One’s ears are also helpless. What can you do? Sounds like cruel fish cruise the air in schools. You could taste the Brown Shirt drums. Rows of flags like the instruments of bands played soldier tunes. So Culp, my colleague, climbs. His voice has little sticky tendrils (and Culp, 1 claim you’re also hairy nosed), little sticky tendrils like collegiate vines.
                                I once went to bed with a nun who had a remarkable one, but I’d just got inside her, when God came to bride her, and i lost the position I’d won.
   I hate all soft fat pillows; they close over you like soft fat walls. Some I’ve seen were satin, hung with mirrors, buttoned down. Susu. I love you. A little like the mantis, I remember, since her head would swivel slowly in the hard inhuman manner of the mantis, and her face was blunted at its points like a badly damaged triangle. Not you, Lou. You stood straight; yet every curve was languorous, smoothly moving like a line drawn through the unobstructed space of sleep. They fell, when shot, in all the ways open. One could have made a study of such falling bodies: the stance, the weight, the tension of the limbs, the impact of the bullet. I love you, Susu—anyway. Even your collarbone . . . like a horse’s headstall. Later, when I saw your name and story in a stack of brutal documents ... I loved you still. At least I’m present for the dawn. Not everyone is. The students will crowd the corridors today, out of the cold, and I shall lecture, fast asleep.
                Crow—0 crow— each time you pass, my sickness grows a little stronger.
   The dust then. It slid through crevices no ant could crawl through, sifting under doors to wedge them shut. It appeared like a sudden hush on polished tables, threw gloom in mirrors, begrimed the beds and grayed the linen, clung to drapes and curtains, filmed milk, sanded flour and sugar, and coated all uncovered food with its special form of granular dismay. On the other hand, the sky on hot dustless days would leap with light, nails would wink in their boards, pails blaze like beacons, and the glass of the several stores would shout the sun at you, empty your head through your ears with whistling sunshine.
   It was a disease, this dust, a plague, a fall of evil, one of the many punishments God had placed upon the people—of which life itself, in Grand, often seemed the longest, most unremitting, and the worst. Year after year summer blew from April like a sabbatical disaster. The storms darkened the creases in faces and etched there crude graffiti of confusion, sorrow, bitterness, defeat. Crow—O crow—each time you pass . . . On hatless heads dust settled so thickly that hair seemed a new grainless crop. Your friends complained of their eyes a lot, earwax was black, and there was an alarming increase in every sort of respiratory ailment. Cattle died, sheep died, dogs, cats, horses, chickens, died; crops failed, gardens suffocated, tree leaves grew heavy, gray, and then died while still growing as the grass had; birds left the air to the dust, flopping through helpless circles in the road sometimes (but after all, where was the air when everything was earth?), butterflies became extinct, though beetles thrived; there were no flowers, no fruit on trees or grapes in arbors; hedges filled with dirt, thistles were prized and even cultivated; lakes contracted, sometimes disappearing altogether; certainly the ponds did, and where they’d lain the ground grinned mockingly, as if in death it too had a human rictus. Stones bleached in dry rivers, the few fish vanished forever, carcasses of all kinds returned to dust just as we had been warned they would, and men moved away on those railroads to the city, and the soft and lazily settling smoke and soot.
   Isn’t it curious that from earth, air, fire, and water, none of the early philosophers chose dirt?
   There was a good deal of praying and preaching. People held extra sessions, special meetings. Some sought symbolic places: shallow depressions which were particularly barren, or low mounds dust would plume from like the snow from Everest; and there they would stand in small lost groups for hours, forlorn, soon nearly mute, trying to call attention to themselves, deliberately facing the brown wind which was slowly killing them, uttering no more musical a cry than the crows did, their beaks choked with carrion and grit. We have not lived the right life, the Methodist minister said, and I agreed.
   It’s dreadful when there’s no one to moan to. The sun would rise spotted and ringed with purple; the sky hadn’t seen, hadn’t listened, although it lidded everything, was everywhere so plainly, and was so plainly infinite (even though eloquent pictures, gray and white with pity, had been printed in national magazines); no, the distant ground was rising just the same, dust drawn up like water by the sun. It was now an unclean yellow, or again a raw orange; there was another storm coming, then another and another, so that tons of topsoil blew out of Iowa and Kansas; in North Dakota the earth, as though souled, rose whining toward hell in its new location. And in the Midwest, that’s where hell is, if there’s any—outside the inside of its inhabitants, I mean; but why shouldn’t they be stiff and sour sometimes, suspicious, stingy, shut in, both murderous and catatonic. They can be friendly, too, when the sky’s not falling; but look at what lives over them, at what they must endure.
           Crow—0 crow— don’t cross my path, so my life lasts a little longer.
           Crow—0 crow— each time you pass, my sickness grows a little stronger.
           I love you so— who would believe it? But there’s no death that I don’t breathe it.
           I’m carrion, crow— how well you know me: my head and chest, the parts below me,
           So go then—go— sup on my body, wipe dry my plate of any bloody;
           And even though that piece you’ve taken is all my heart hate hasn’t eaten,
           You’re welcome—no—
           I don’t begrudge it. Quick with your beak so teeth won’t touch it,
           And let me show the honest of my bones, my jaw, its laughter; joy as never—
                  whatever^ after.
   In some ways the grasshoppers were worse, for they were their own wind, and a living dust, a dust winged, each grain with a chewing mouth. God had breathed life into clay again, and was distributing it differently this time—by means of sky—over the whole earth. The dust howled and hissed, or otherwise moved with a harsh shush, but the grasshoppers had a dry whirr and rustle, a toy chirp, a click almost mechanical, a stridulation which became a scream. This was new speech; this was greed made manifest and multiplied like man, greed given a body appropriate to it, with long hind-leaping legs and feet, motive wings, tireless jaws, and no nervous tics about food. They would eat the fur from cats, some said. And so they came in wide flat covering clouds, in enormous flooding sheets—millions and millions of swallowing mouths. I never saw a cyclone clean the ground as they could clean it. Fields went up in minutes—as though in flames, in smokeless hunger. Where they settled down the land seethed. Streets rained their color (a yellow brown green), sidewalks crawled, your feet could not avoid them, so wherever you went (and you went nowhere if possible) you heard and dimly felt the crunch of soft shells. They were often packed so closely, clambering over one another (you would also find them stacked sometimes like plates), they seemed one monstrous animal with exposed cells, a model made to please, instruct, amaze, and thoroughly mislead the third grade; a scientific demonstration of the wee workers of the body, all those hidden inner bees, each with that small but vital task he carried out so faithfully. This was an illusion, for within the mass, movement was a matter of chance. They did not carry water for one another. There was no surrender of powers, and they composed no true Leviathan. Vast and protean, unimaginably hungry, obeying simple principles of want and motion, one supposed, somewhat as Hobbes had dreamed, the swarm was nevertheless a monster of chaos, Fiihrerless. The understanding had to resort to Planmantee’s stats and calculations concerning chance. There were simply too many for life to have any individual importance; each one was utterly careless of it, and supremely unintelligent. They had only two aims: to feed and breed; and they relied on numbers to make up for their stupidity. Don’t tell me mere addition can't accomplish qualitative change, it can—with frightening ease. They came out of Canada, some said, from the slopes of the Rockies; others muttered darkly: Asia. But this was the pure, the primeval horde. The Great Khan certainly could not have loosed it. Still, I was constantly compelled to see them as versions of us, just as the dust was a version: Nature representing on its several planes the same serene and universal forms by means of massive, blind, and automatic spasms. I’d recently returned form my first visit to Germany then, in a thoroughly Nazi mood, bewildering my friends with my talk, and I clearly remember reflecting, as I watched the hoppers browse: there are more of these grass-chewing jaws in Iowa than there are Jews in Germany.
   While Thales taught that everything was full of gods: new-combed hair especially, silk, rugs, amber.
   And Heraclitus said that everything was fire—at first blush a foolish claim— due no doubt to his appetite for grass and his arrogant attitudes: for one, that the universe is a heap of steaming dung.
   I don't know how tall the tales were that were told of their voraciousness, the mouthlust of the locust—how they ate the paint from barns—but observing that insatiable mob prepared me for anything. I understand they would eat themselves if the eaten one were dead.
   And beer would cover the table like a cloth. The sawdusted floor would nevertheless let you slip. Susu was herself a silken sliver, illicit wish. 3aM/e me, 3)ic/cie, (U/myfuvnh       Smoke made our eyes bleed, while song poured
out of a hundred mouths. I would place both palms on the cool white wall where I went to piss. Hold my breath as long. Steins shaped like castle keeps and capped like cocks kept time. My god. The band was loud. Let no one look at mine. Alone, home, holding it, 1 dissolve in sleep like sodden bread.
   I carom from room to room in this house, from wall to wall, bruised by pillows, whipped by curtains, bitten by rugs; and I know that men are capable of anything; that all of the things possible to men are therefore possible for me. There is no final safety from oneself. It is something we often say, but only the mad believe it, the consequences are so awesome, and so infinite. In that sense Hitler’s been the only God. But must I always live in Germany?
   That same year I remember wandering idly into a patch of high grass, probably because it was so rare to find luxury in Grand 1 had to have it, and they started up like quail, in a whimng rush of thousands, all around me the way the air jet in a fun house will blow a lady’s skirt about her head while her arms flail at it. They did not go off in a single burst which might have cleared them from me. They continued up like thick smoke; I was caught in a stifling funnel. Grasshoppers do not spiral like flies or bees, but leap in a gale, so the feeling of whirlwind 1 had, of their coming straight from my feet and circling round me, was hopelessly unfactual, and even that sensation was one 1 had afterward, when I tried to save a little of my sanity by sorting my impressions and systematically swallowing them, draining my sickness from my head and putting my past in my belly. I ran as they rose, tripped instantly, and stumbled—wailing like a paper siren. Grasshoppers flew in my mouth: one? three? thousand? 1 was on the ground, insects crushed under me, gushing vomit. They were caught in my hair, leaping at my ears and eyes. I began to choke, trying to cry out, thrashing and rolling in utter panic. A grown man, I was being consumed by terror in a patch of knee-high grass, not four feet from safety.
   Back at the house I had to have a bath. I’d also shave, and use new lotions. That crawling sensation is common (when your sweat is a running ant), but I half expected to see something horrible happening; not quite in Kafka's sense: antennae sprouting, fine barbs showing along the inner hinges of my arms; absurdly, I did not feel my metamorphosis, but theirs—their modulation into me. I thought I’d find my skin looking emptied like a grocery sack, my tan the wadding surface of the paper. The grasshoppers had got what they came for—a humanity. Wasn’t that why they fed so furiously, ate away at everything? In that field they’d overcome me like a thousand shouts. And hadn’t I mated with them now? hadn’t I taken them, leaping, in my mouth? and hadn’t I been sick in the same way the first lady who loved me in an oral fashion had, returning my seed and herself to my organ: spasm for spasm, love for love, revenge for revenge, in perfect proportion? How futile a bath had been. What could I wash? Lovely lady, splendid mouth, she did not do as she intended, but only as she wanted. Nevertheless, I had to have a bath, and my new lotions. As I threw my shirt off, cursing and still in a panic, one of the little yellowy devils dropped with a light rap on the table. He’d lain hidden in my hair. He’d been in a pocket. I’d spoken him. There he sat. He was so prehistoric, so reptilian, with his saurian skull, those carefully articulated plates on his body, that blank watchfulness which Susu had so much of, a watchfulness—a mirror’s you knew there was no consciousness behind . . . something is watching, something is watchful, but what? At the back of Susu’s eyes, of course, there was plenty; there was Hieronymus Bosch, there were diableries . . . x> my /ife /oa& a ... I struck at him with my shoe (I was going to inlay the table with the fine lines which veined his wings) (the first cunt I tasted was stale), but a shoe is a poor swatter, it has no holes and advertises its coming, so naturally I missed, and missed, and missed—while he shot off in senseless leaps which brought him crashing against a window, into a mirror, onto a wall, at the foot, base, sill of which he’d drop, stunned, while my shoe fell on him. Yet he always managed to get off ahead of the heel, and for a time I could hear him ringing frantically on the exposed springs of my bed. Let’s try again, sweetie; let’s try again. I have drunk ale from the country of the young . . . Sweet cream of Christ, why? It’s really sweet, sweetie; it's soupy, but sweet; I won’t throw up again. But Marty, it’s not. It’s sort of flat and slimy. Her lips drew startled from her evened teeth. Her fat face rosied. How do you know what it tastes like, she said. Yes. How did I know? Like grasshoppers which are fried in China, hung in acrid strings? like those the Mexicans coat with chocolate, or do they dip bees? I thought there might be more of them on me (there, in the patching of my pubic hair, there d be one, nesting), so as 1 was hitting about with one shoe, or throwing the other, I was trying to remove the rest of my clothing. Then he would come toward me again like a triggered spring. I was going to scream and run from the room (I had already roused the house with the sound of my whacking) when he dropped with a clang into a
wastebasket I’d, as a schoolchild, decorated, and I quickly stuffed a pillow in the opening. Nearly naked, sitting on the floor by the basket, giggling as 1 tugged at the toes of my socks, I thought of The Tell-Tale Heart," for as he jumped and fell back, and in a moment jumped and fell back again, the metal dinged, chiming in
those erratic seconds what for me were nightlong hours. I stepped on the pillow_
slowly—till it bore my weight.
   We have not lived
                  If I could piss as perfectly as Lloyd George speaks, said Clemenceau,
                  I wouldn’t do wee-wee for weeks, never—no; then in Rabelais’ way I’d make Wilson all day, till the seams of the entente sprang leaks.
   Herschel here near me. Governali. Culp. My colleagues. Have you heard? The sky is falling. Bill wants to save themselves who can. The wind is rising. Bill wants to tongue a hot tamale. Dein ist mein ganzes Herz. 1 hear the clatter of large dry leaves. The snow wants mowing. Bill wants to hide Henry in his hands. Where the Hun will never find him. By sorrow’s side . . .
   Culp is prepared to pay five dollars for a truly tragical limerick.
   Your history is your only individuality, Os insists, but in History with the great H, we average that out. And what we don’t average, we flatten with our fearless foot. Planmantee’s is ponderous, gleaming, immense. The lenses of his glasses are thick and gray and hang before his eyes like clouds. Planmantee is a large man like a large dog. His cruelty, his verbal coarseness, his trick specs, do not go well with his tie, vest, shirt, his military bearing, his bright alert look, his full-dress dignity. Governali, who believes in History with the great H (indeed, in Greatness itself with a great G), seems delicate beside him, and dandified, as though he ought to be wearing a waxed mustache and penetrating scent. Despite his devotion to GH, Governali always seems distracted: he’s bemused by a wrong number; he has mislaid a trifling memo, and although he doesn’t want the memo, he certainly would like to know where he put it; someone has peeled an orange into his wastebasket; his copy of Livy has not been returned; he is out of stamps; will it rain when he hasn’t his umbrella? he fears he’s not got enough money for lunch. Still, he’s dapper, immaculate, fulsomely rhetorical and passionate. Herschel, however, sags in his suit as though it were full of mail. Herschel nibbles at major concerns and then nervously skitters away; dismay pollutes his atmosphere; he sighs often, each like a smothered fart. 1, on the other hand, I ... I look like a man in a restaurant eating alone.
ENTRY NO. 106 I knew a remarkable seagull
                who followed the sleepwalks of people.
                She would snap in her jaws
                every dream they would toss,
                since a nightmare’s a marvelous meal.
   I would hate to have my wife see this. No. I can’t have that. She rarely comes here. Never pokes about or pries. Still, 1 dare not stuff these pages behind my books the way I’ve hidden Lou’s letters. Is this lack of suspicion suspicious? No, poor sweet. It’s a simple world for her. A curtain fluttering—that’s how she is—lives, moves—obediently, yet with every appearance of freedom and caprice. Yet fat. Bosoms like tho'se water bladders slung across the backs of donkeys: they carry safety through the desert. And every roll she has fits a crease in me. Oh, we re well matched. Of course she's not unconscious as a curtain. And very sober. Not like mum. I’d never marry one like Mum. "You’ve a chest like a pirate’s—full of treasure,” I said. Could I have once believed that? No. Impossible. 1 must have been lying. Like all those notes I still have to write to accompany our anniversary presents. I wonder what we’ve got to by now— what’s past wood and leather: skin? hair? Well, there are things she knows, it’s true, knows as no one should, but these . . . they are fragile, thin, and formless . . . gauzy see-throughs—all of them; otherwise, like fat, she collects: ancestors, objects, animals; things palpable and ponderous as she is, although she moves as if on tiptoe through them. Draped like Isadora Duncan—from the neck—she sails along that endless lineage which has, like plumbing from the closets of the rich, sewered Uncle Balt redolently from its present end; and, oh, she also floats among the massive stained-oak sideboards menacing so many of our rooms, the grotesque bureaus postulating with malformed cupids, birds (there seem each day some new ones), eviscerated angels, flowers with stems like tangled rope, and snarling bears whose open mouths hold thick brass handles between them, shiny as sucked bones. Yes, she's the superior being here; she feels the air; the forces sweep her about as though she were weightless fluff; she happily yields, and everyone admires how beautifully she expresses herself. And what do I do? I stumble to my desk and try to
   When I write about the Third Reich, or now, when I write about myself, is it truly the truth I want? What do I want? to find out who I am? What is the good of that? I want to feel a little less uneasy. We drag our acts behind us like a string of monsters. I am the Reich, the third son, the remains. This sort of thing—confession—this father-forgive-me stuff—is not in my line. My thoughts fly out like Zeno’s arrow, still to stand. No, nor’s the tone. My customary tone is scholarly. I always move with care. And I’ve been praised for weight, the substance of my thought. But it’s not the way I feel I want to speak
now, and I realize (I've come to it as I write) that my subject’s far too serious for scholarship, for history, and I must find another form before I let what’s captive in me out. Imagine: history not serious enough, causality too comical, chronology insufficiently precise. That’s the measure of my turn. It surely is. That I should ever frame such sentences. Even in my mind. Even in that mind I’ve done my famous work on—yes, thrown open to the world. Professor Kohler has given to the German mind a public place in nature. Men may walk about it now like someone waiting for a bus, and feed the birds. That last, of course, old Bjornson didn’t say; it’s what I say myself.
   If I could simply feel a little less uneasy. That would help.
              August Bees
   Now it is another day. Rain is speaking gently to the terrace. I speak gently, sometimes, to myself. How soft the light is, mingled with the wet.
   We had one shortened summer month together, Lou and I ... my god, even the decade’s gone. Pleading the pressures of work, I excused myself from my life and settled in a second-story room in western New York. A wooden stair fell from one widened window like a slide of cards. We hung our towels there: a shirt sometimes, a slip as discreet as a leer. I remember particularly the quiet empty streets, the long walk to the beach. Well, it was scarcely a beach, though there was a pier, and even in August the water was cool in those thin deep lakes the patient passion of the glaciers scratched. My chief memory is the heat, the silence, your pale breasts. Pale as a bleached leaf. I do not understand what makes another body so appealing.
   A souvenir scarf, salmon pink and exuberantly fringed (but not a memory of mine) lay across the dresser. And there was an old oak commode, solid as a safe. I also recall one stiff chair, committed to good posture and discomfort, its caning gone and the hole boarded up like a broken window, with the seat-wood covered in some kind of slippery cloth on which designs suggestive of breakfast commanded the eater to be shortly up and at’em. Well. So there were these wan leftover creatures still: the glass dish your hairpins lay in, a distant green like some remembered portion of the sea, so from the side the pins seemed a school of small fish; the lamp which leaned, threatening to slide the shade outside the limits of its bulbshine; the black metal basket where an orange flower flared like a match, and where you would toss the Kleenex you wiped yourself with, seed-soaked, relaxed, in a soft wad. So. These things. Then you and I. We were wonderful in our willingness, weren’t we? You and I then. And now is it all ash? some sweetmeat
scrubbed from the teeth? These days the soft cloth which receives my relief gets washed. And the walls ... the walls were . . . Damn. There was a rug—yes, there was a rug—its design by a dime-store Indian. And didn’t we have a clock we kept in the pocket of its case—somewhere a quiet tick, a measure we forgot? The picture you wanted to turn to the wall. . . was ... Of a Civil War encampment.
   If you grasped that stair rail, white paint would powder your hand. Now I had captured your love, I was already counting the cost.
   Every morning we ate an orange, and you walked off to the lake to swim while I read until eleven when I met you there. We circled the lake so closely we kept our image always in the water, and we ate our lunch from the same brown sack we used to feed the ducks, the sack the grocer dropped our oranges in, half a dozen at a time. The scent of the peel would often linger on my thumbs, the zest of the rind still lodged beneath the nail near the quick. Then in the afternoon we would nap and sweat through the deep heat, our limbs loose as rags, and walk once more down the elm-tented street for a dip, holding hands which had held our bodies together better than our bones. In the evenings I wrote or we listened to the radio a little, and you would let your long hair dry on our single pillow. It was the simplest sort of life, empty of everything except ourselves, the contentment we were wrapped in like patriotic bunting. I wrote the section of Guilt and Innocence on ... on secondary schools . . . almost entirely out of my head—easily—even the songs . . .
                Unsem Fiihrer lieben wir,
                Unsera Fiihrer ehren wir,
                Unsem Fiihrer folgen wir,
                Bis wir Manner werden ...
hardly taking thought. Bugs would bang against the screen during the early hours of the night, a car might cough, or very far away a truck labor up a hill, and the morning light would be gray and heavy with humidity. I would stand naked at the top of our wooden stairs while you completed your sleep, accosting a day which wasn’t quite ready, and waiting for a breeze to brush the hair on my legs the way your breath would caress me in advance of your tongue.
   We were happy because we had no history. I know that now. Though 1 was writing what is called history. I wrote: Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany, Chapter Twelve. Our winter room was full of the snow which had fallen between us, the cold wind my wife blew, your desire to have all of me, as though I were entirely at leisure, and had no book, no profession, no family, no commitments to the world. I only wanted to play eine, meine, mine, mu, and you eventually tired of being a meadow for my slow fat herds; but in that warm still heavy summer even the stars were wet, and I would wait for a wind, a faint stir
in the grass tips, that movement of life in the poplars which signified a breeze, and through the screen, with its fly’s-eye view, watch the light slide along your body as if that were air, too, suddenly become skin.
   It sometimes seems to me, in morbidly fanciful moments, as if age were aimed at, not simply suffered, for I fled my youth as if it were a disease. I wanted adolescence as 1 wanted its acne. And 1 can believe those who argue that memory is not enough to establish the reality of the self, because the selves 1 remember I remember like photos in the family album: that knickered kid, that bald scrawny brat, that fuzz- and fat-faced second louie, that solemn owl in his flat black hat— they are relatives of mine at best, school chums scarcely recollected, unidentified individuals who have somehow slunk into the group and grin at the blank beside their name. 1 can unearth someone shouting slogans in a German street, but that loud rowdy could never have been played by the soft-voiced and suety professor I have since become; nor can I long for you any longer in the old way—that pain is also past—since the lover who lingered over you like a nurse through an illness— I see that now—is now another man, no longer a lover of any kind, just as you are, Lou, a different set of lips, another pair of breasts, some further furry tunnel.
   How odd it must seem to that murderer of Jews who is apprehended in his watch shop in Ulm and his ghost dragged away to justice. 1 am not that man, he wants to say. Those letters and diaries that accuse me accuse a photograph—a faded paper image. Well.
   1 always am, and never was; but who wants to be what they have been? Only those like Lou whose souls are the same as their skins; those whose bodies have beauty and skill, grace and accomplishment: the ballplayer, the harlot, the model, the dancer, the beach boy—any bebuggered beauty.
   Time is an enemy of matter, not of mind, and history (as I said to Governali), so long as it is tied to Time like a tin can to the rear of the wedding car, can only be a recital of. . . tents. There were tents, men slouching in grain-sacky heaps, stacked arms. You
   Oh. No. I’m not your second-story man anymore. Another story has intervened. The beauty which 1 had from you        Tents. Tired men. Smoke. Still
air. Stacked arms. The pale pattern of your bra, like something which has lain too long across grass, as that scarf lay across its dresser, is one I watch a former self observe, a self which could have returned through the screen to spread itself like a brown glaze over your breasts, not this body which is all mine now— and a mind which is pure bleach.
   You turned the tents to the wall, hid the huddles of men, the limp flag, the dog. There was, of course, an amber patch behind it, and its paper back was brown and parched and marked with black crayon, a line of dust along the wire. The shadow of its neglect lay upon it, the paper dry and drawn up tight till it tore where it drew back from its glue. Yet you preferred the blank backside of
the image. The hammered frame, back there, was smooth. And now I remember what the walls were. 1 have recovered the color of unskimmed cream.
   That one small room made us more than normally neat. We so rubbed and moistened one another, we did not disturb the collar stay on the other window’s windowsill, or the pin in the corner by the hall door. It was    We
spent whole days consuming an hour. We were rich. We made hay. Sunshine fell like a shower. We bathed.
   Well. I regret the loss of the lover who loved you (hourly, I regret it), but not the loss of the slogan shouter, the maker of messes, I once was. The fingers which slipped through the enchanted forest of your twat—I promise—did not heft that rock on Kristallnacht. It's as if my forties had canceled my twenties out, and my fifties stamped PA I 0 on both. And beyond the tents, the men, the tented arms, I think I see a station, stacks of wood. There were a few beards on the men and many small mustaches. This was a world—our old world—turned to the wall like the cliche said. Some were sitting cross-legged. I remember particularly our sandaled footfalls and your hand—the light way it led the swing of our arms.
   Suddenly the temperature fell like a stone scuffed over a cliff, and when you woke, as surprised by the chill as the trees, 1 tossed you a towel to cover yourself, and you held to your breasts half a dozen honey bees which had sought shelter in its folds.
   But Chapter Twelve of Guilt and Innocence had come from my head like a flow of tears; and I remember I wanted the gaze of my healthy German kids, the pure Schein of the facts, to concentrate in the nib of my pen, look back at my words the way those men stared, as they had to, stolidly at the lens, into the heart of the black hood which would eventually hold all that remained of their lives. Poets are the bees of the invisible, Rilke said. A stray strand of hair ran like a crack across your chest. Am I still that astonished self? that innocent who attacked you from afar? Later, small red spots would come out on your breasts when you showered, memories of a flesh 1 could not scar with my kisses or, with my worship, bless. It got hot again, but our summer’s month was over. For as long as we were together, you held those bees against me.
                 A swarm of bees in May Is worth a load of hay;
                 A swarm of bees in June Is worth a silver spoon;
                 A swarm of bees in July Is not worth a fly.
   Commode. Scarf. Dresser. Go-get-'em chair. The sea-green dish. The sliding shade. The flower. School of fish. My seed. And when we left that room we left it just that way: the twisted, hammered towel, the tents, men, rifles, turned to the wall, one tom orange, that heat and that humidity, dead bees crushed in the cloth.
   1 would hate to have my wife see this. Yes. I can’t risk that. I’m not sure how much she suspects, or just what she is suspicious of—my study studies or my basement business—but she’s become nervous and wary (I worry her, I wander a bit too much, I wash my hands at odd hours, I disappear like the moon during daylight, I brush off my knees and cuffs), even though I have every reason to believe she no longer cares what I get myself up or down to. My pecker’s piccadillies, as she says, have ceased to be her concern. Yet 1 also find her on edge as though she were a fat round knife, precariously poised, tense at table. Oh well, why worry? she’d float, if pushed, like a bubble of soap. Still, these sheets would shock her, I’m sure, more than if I’d dirtied our own sacred linen with my wormed-out sperm. I remember particularly your warm mouth lowered over me, as humid and encompassing as the summer itself. Is it really possible that the finest sensations in life are simple: the delicate brush of Lou’s hair across my chest, for instance? Yes. It is possible. Or was it the feeling I felt in each length as they drifted over me, the love I perceived in their gentle tickle? Yes. That was possible too. With Lou’s soft first kiss, wasn’t it mainly the miracle of its happening at all which made it so wondrous, so plainly impossible? And was I waiting on the stair for the world’s wind to do the same, to display for me that rare union of meaning, gesture, and understanding, which the artist gnaws up knuckles to achieve? O. Oooh . . . the decades I’ve done in and then abandoned without even waiting for the wounds to bleed!
   Lowered over me. Lowered. oooOH . . . Although the mind may mean it to be mute, the indwelling spirit of the lip is too expressive to be stifled. Even the unrouged pulp—fat or chapped as may be, loose, chewed, tight at times, lascivious and wet—gives everything away. Listen. It’s soft even when stern. I say it’s alive even when asleep. I say the mouth is the home—nay! the throne—of the soul. And because it is the sacred place of speech—hearten me, Culp, you Linguaphone professor, you leaker of facile rhyme—its outline is a natural logo, both for love and the divine, invisible AojfOs of the Greek—everywhere as easy for the understanding as a traffic light or cola sign. Yes. It’s possible. And a megaphone for our emotions, Herschel, wouldn’t you say? Lowered. Lowered Over Me. The soft acceptance of my seedful shape. It is the very instrument of hunger, the dry throat’s door, and still an unstaunched source of song, despite the competition from complaint, whine, howl, whisper, shout. Yes. It is indeed that sacred place where the tongue shows consciousness a safe way
out into the world, through dangers, awkward winds and sudden washes, between teeth now sheathed as for fellatio, eh, Governali? don’t we wish? and during that brief bliss called peace.
   Jutting into the lake, 1 particularly remember a short stretch of iron-hard rock on which a few evergreens stood to astonish their stone, as if, through the nail of one’s little finger, hair had unaccountably begun to grow. It is important to remember that the mouth is our most precious place, more private than our privates: in evidence of which I cite the fact that Martha ceased kissing me (those long hungry kisses of early and unsated love, the first draws on the straw) years before she turned her hole to the wall. No matter now. Sometimes I thought Lou and 1 were on the brink of one another: at those points of ultimate pleasure which, to press beyond, would mutually dissolve and recombine our souls; but we were not about to risk such atomic rearrangements; the chemistry of the molecule was as far as we would go; and we grew predictably cellular together. Well, Lou . . . Lowered over. Well ... No matter. I must dispose of these leaves in some safe way, and now, in this bitter moment, the method comes back to me. I shall slide them between the pages of my manuscript. That’s a stack she’ll never care or have cause to look through; a book— poor sweet—she’ll never read.
                                           kyklos
                                          cyclone
                                           tomar
                                          tornado
                                         whirlwind
                                   Wind und Wasserhosen
                                      god’s soda straw hog-swal
                                          1
                                          o
                                            w
                                            i
                                          n
                                          g
                                             s
                                           n
                                           a
                                              k
           IT WAS NOT ENOUGH that there was e dust or grasshoppers almost as numerous, the air itself—thick, silent, yellow light—with no help from
anyone, became murderous and whimsical; ran counter to the clock, just as we all do sometimes, swallowing everything, driving slivers into posts like nails, running trains to Oz, and working other windy miracles, some of which resembled a rescue, by ascension, of the populace, a quite general apotheosis; and though umbilicaled to its cloud, dependent as a lamp string, quirky as a camp guard (1 have read it said), this violent tunnel turning through the sky is really a swollen prick the earth, our Mother, spews on, and it covers its shame at this response with these other symbols; it forms from implausible figures plausible, phallus-saving lies.
   We were visiting my Uncle Balt when the wind came. I lay down under a table and became a rug. The air was still as I wanted to stay, a stopped clock.
1 could feel it everywhere like fur. Uncle Balt was calling my mother. He wanted her to come quickly from her room upstairs. Urgency was obvious in his voice: large and hollow as a spook's. The summons, loud and insistent though it was, seemed nailed in place like a painted sign; and we all remained motionless like something laid aside in an attic. 1 had never been at the bedside of the dying then, but that was the kind of hush I heard. MARGARET! MARGA           The slam was hard and blunt, like a ballbat, and the house
jerked. I felt 1 had been shut like a door myself. The world rolled by the front window as though we were on a tossing boat, and dizziness drew me to it. I began to crawl out from under the table, but then, looking up, I saw my mother on the landing of the stair, her hair as white as sugar, and a look on her face 1 would recognize when I buried her, colorless beneath her cosmetic as though she had, in that electric second, fled her blood. Indeed, decades later she did just that—discreetly—through vessels broken in her throat, so she spilled her thin life quietly into herself like a sink. She died in the same sly way she had always sipped her water-dissembling gin—like a cat lapping at a tap drip— each night retching from a previous day.
   She stepped down slowly, quite erect, as though balancing her head on a broken neck, till she encountered me, whimpering at her ankles like a puppy. It was not as if time itself had ceased, but as if some iceman’s careless pick had chipped these moments from the main cake and left them to melt by themselves. Then I felt my mother's hand touch my back and a light dry rain on my neck as though of sand. Through a hole in the house there was a vast and steady howling I still have no image for. Margaret, however, was deaf till morning, and spared that torment. We never knew whether it was a bolt of lightning or the wind which blew the landing window into smithereens at the moment my mother was passing it, but only the slowest and most careful combing got the glass out, blown as it was against her scalp, and clinging to every strand of hair like frost on blades of frozen grass.
   On another day, despite repeated warnings from the radio, I accompanied my father as he drove our Chevy into a somber, thickly painted sky. We could sense a suffocating calm to the atmosphere even in the car, and observe our wheel dust rising in a slow roll as a shaken rug would behind us, only to subside like feathers in a vacuum, embarrassed to be stirring at all, as if all other movement had gone to make the whirlwind. Hemmed in by the endless corn, my father stopped the car, and we fled across the road to hide in a kind of culvert while the wind, in the guise of a train, came nearer and nearer, finally passing so close above us my breath was drawn out of me with a sudden thok! like a cork fired off in the funnel. Now I would say that the Angel of Death had parted our hair, but at the age of ten the truth is all you can endure. My father held me down and 1 gripped the ground with my fists and both arms. Again I experienced that shaved-off slice of time. When we climbed out of the ditch, shredded cornstalks were floating gently everywhere like snow, and through the field there was a lane large enough for cows. Afterward my father joked that I’d peed in my pants, but I hadn’t. I had bruised my arms.
   NEXT: blizzards and deep frost, torrential rains, and those long empty days
                    Yes. That must be it, because when, when there’s nothing, when the country’s becalmed, when Grand seems truly
                    with a moistened finger, I rub my fixed to the earth, driven in like a stake, its circle frazzled by the sledge, and the
                                                          penis just beneath its tip (the ultimate
                                                          trains labor in their own smoke,
point of pleasure, the masculine clit), the sensation lacks that additional dimen-struggle to escape the smothering cloth,
sion Lou’s hair had, since that tenderly stroking finger belongs to me, 1 know the hangman’s hood they manufacture;
                    my mind, and why I can take little comfort from the sort of love it bears toward
when every car is noosed to the engine,
me or the aims which make up its triangular intention.
each an act in the past which can’t be shunted; and since I see the engine moving, I know the trap’s been sprung; I see the straining motion of its slowing fall; it will be dead of its distance before the jerk which signals stop. So the people die here of their days. Only the nights are sometimes a wonder. Then, from limit to limit, the whole sky is lit, and if you want to think of the stars as watchful but unconscious eyes, they’re no longer a menace. Look up. Study heaven till your neck tires of its bleak sublimity. Those specks are not a snow so high the flakes have yet to narrow in their fall together, as—from everywhere—a
crowd collects. Instead, a scrubbed moon strolls its shadow like a window-shopper all through Grand. The loneliness, the isolation of everything is transfigured, run together in that light. As though we were a plane and they the ground, we look down like stars ourselves upon those tiny disconnected towns, and wonder who might live in them; what life is like in such remote stations, benevolent because they glow so, believing in the moment that it must be nice to hang around the moon as singly and as brilliantly as they do; and in all that, in these fine generous rare feelings, be utterly mistaken.
   And what did I read about you, Susu, in those documents? Susu, my slender singer, whom I love? that you roasted the thumbs of a dozen Jews and ate them while they watched . . . those who had not fainted.
                  When the smoldering Morro Castle, under tow to New York, snapped her lines and became snagged on a sand bar only a few yards off Convention Pier in Asbury Park, bodies began to bob up on Asbury beaches; 25 cents was charged to gaze upon the stricken ocean liner from the Hall; at night people crept aboard to steal from the bodies and loot the ship, hacking off fingers to get their rings; while a mortician, among the spectators on the pier, passed out his business card.
   Is there any way of digesting facts like this—like this one—as Susu digested the handy phallic thumb-sticks of her Jews? Why she didn’t have their cocks cut, I cannot imagine. Wasn’t that what she was up to? Could she—my Susu— have shrunk at it? Hers certainly wasn't an anti-Semitic act, because it violated the Nazis’ dietary laws. Could she have sucked such thumbs without the Reich’s grand plans? could she have realized herself and come so splendidly upon her nature? She might have sung songs all her life and fingered milkless leather dildoes, who can tell? Susu, you at least became a true black queen; the evil you created was as close to you as you were; you confronted it; you took it in your mouth; added it, quite palpably, as weight, as measurable nutrition, to your hard flat-stomached self. In fact I always wondered just how much you were a woman. No. A man in drag, that kind of ersatz queen, would fashion for himself an ampler bosom—not so ample as my wife’s perhaps, there is a limit. What did I find to admire—ever—in such flaps? The Germans executed my Susu themselves. Neither her exemplary performance as a commandant’s whore, nor her sweetly twisted songs and whispered singing, could save her when they found she had some gypsy in her, though after her head was amputated, color photographs were taken, and kept as souvenirs in little folding cases covered neatly in blue cloth, with a small, though conventional, gold decoration.
  The howling of the wind in the window . . . Uncle Balt yelling . . . Several sounds that bombs made . . . The eerie echoes you sometimes get in caves . . . They get replayed.
            Uncle Balt and the Nature of Being
   Yet why should I remember Uncle Balt. He’s dead now. I’m half. He never meant much to me; though back then, I suppose, he meant something. People often have value for you when you’re ten. And for a lot of odd reasons. Ten is not an even age.
   We had a huge storm the other day—a Great Plains wind—and it churned up the cornfield behind the house like a shallow lake. I told Martha once more about the time a bolt of lightning struck a landing window at the very moment my mother was descending the stairs, and how powdered glass had filled her hair so it looked like the head of a fall weed, the bolt blowing away her blood, too, like foam from a beer, and leaving her faint. Later, after she had had shock treatment and her hair was white with alcohol and age, she would be disoriented again as she was then. Anyway, it took a long time to comb the glass out without scratching her scalp. I remember Uncle Balt had been calling to her about the wind, warning her, telling her to come down.
   I always thought of him as a deep, unreadable, hole of a man—a well of loneliness. There you are: of course I didn’t think of him that way when I was ten or twelve, a tiresome time, or at nine either, the neuter’s age. Maybe, by the year I reached thirty—thirty-five—and I had read the novel, anticipating the little excitement I didn’t receive, I’d have come to the conclusion that for anything that befell him there would be a long fall before one heard—I heard—or thought I heard—the plop. But, as I say, my mind rarely entertained his figure, offered him anything but forgetfulness and silence.
   Yet that was what he fed on. So it seemed. He was Dasein’s quiet cancellation. Dasein indeed. More archery into the infinite. And there I go again.
   Tall, thin, slightly cadaverous, Uncle Balt’s voice issued from his body as from a length of pipe. He was completely and supremely “an uncle.” I saw him rarely, so he retained a foreign flavor for me, an exotic far-offness that his mus-
tache—two droopy loops of thin black rope—did nothing to diminish. He had an immense stride, and a posture like his gaze: straight, unbending, blunt. Work had pastured his face the way weather wears a field. Past burning, beyond tanning, not even any longer leathered, it seemed the sorrowful smoothing out of some angrily wadded paper, his bones like the shadows of bones behind his skin, a gift from the butcher for the dog.
   I marveled, 1 remember, at his hands, with their huge knuckles hard and round as the wooden spools in my set of Tinker Toys. These knuckles nearly made him up: his wrists, elbows, Adam’s apple, cheekbones, nose, were knuckles. I called him Uncle Knuckle for a while.
   He wore overalls over long underwear, even to the dinner table, where he insisted on saying grace, his O LORD like a bull’s bellow. He took more time over the saying of grace than he did in eating. He did say a good grace, though: full of very particular gratitudes, intensely meant. He ate very swiftly, very neatly, with both hands; they flew at his mouth like bees; and then his napkin would cover the chewing as though it were a biscuit basket. Still, from the side where I sat, I could see his jaw moving as rapidly as the treadle on granny’s sewing machine. When he had chewed his food, the napkin would be withdrawn like a curtain, and Uncle Balt would look at us all with stern amusement. WELL, WHAT HAPPENED TODAY? NO HOEIN, NO ROWIN, NO PLANTIN, NO WEED1N OR PINCHIN BACK, I BET. NO SEWIN, NO BAKIN, NO RUBB1N AROUND WITH RAGS, I GUESS. Our first forkfuls still in our mouths, he would wait for an answer (or at least that's what I supposed he was doing), and not immediately receiving any, his head would bob once like a bird’s. YOUNGSTER? WERE YOU A LOT OF HELP CREATIN CRUMBS? YOUR GRANDMA, NOW, DID SHE NEED SOME ASSISTANCE WITH THE GABBLE-GABBLE? I dunno, I went walkin. OH? WELL. WALKIN IS HARD. HARD. YOU MUST BE CLEAN BLOWED OVER. Or sometimes it was HAILED FLAT and THRESHED OUT. He used these farm-life terms like a sailor. It kept him safely in his world and you quite firmly out. Uncle Balt would pour cream in his coffee and watch the pale stream curl, the coffee cool as it clouded. SO MUCH ALMIGHTY HENNIN GOIN ON, THE SUN STOPPED TO TALK TOO. This was a sign for my Uncle Balt to fold his napkin and rise, tall as a tower, I thought, the oat and wheat stems, the corn tassel he’d tucked in the tiny pockets of his bib (I guess to check the progress of the crop), shuddering as though back in the field. Then he would bring his coffee in a swoop to his mouth and toss it down his throat like dipper rinsing. All of a sudden he was through the kitchen to the yard where we knew he’d be checking on granny’s vegetable garden and grumbling deep in his throat.
   He folded over like a ruler from the waist. His knobby hands would flicker through the bean leaves. He would sometimes carry a caterpillar to me on his
arm—a swallowtail often—from the parsley. His forearm alongside and overwhelming mine, we would watch without a word the caterpillar crawl gingerly down onto my reluctant wrist.
   At ten you can’t compare those many light steps to the passage of a lover’s lips.
   The bugs Uncle Balt discovered on the beans he would crush against his thumb, or cut in two with his yellowed nail—sharp, I thought, as a stone knife. He liked to rub a tomato leaf near his nose as 1 do mint—better smell than marigold, SNIFF THAT, he said—and then his fingers would be thrust in the soil where they made a fist the way 1 always wanted my steam shovel to take hold, grab and grip. TOO DAMN DRY, he’d shout, though I suspect he wasn’t shouting, simply stating, giving voice to a fact. MARGARET. GET YOUR MOTHER TO HOE THIS ROW. MORE WEEDS THAN WORRIES ALONG HERE. He would eat a bean or pea pod whole.
   There were a few more hours of light—till nine, sometimes—that’s what he meant by saying the sun had stopped to talk with the wimmin—so Uncle Balt was off on some chore or other, disappearing down rows where I wanted to follow him, scared I’d get lost in the com otherwise; or he’d stride through the orchard like that Rodin statue—so complete in his walking he had no arms, and too fast for me to keep up. He liked to stop on a little rise just beyond the hawthorn thicket where you could see a stand of wheat like ten thousand German arms salute their leader. Except they hadn’t their leader then. There I go.
   MARGARET! I was flat beneath the dining room table, held there by my fear of the heavy air. I heard my mother’s footsteps, even in those days irregular and distinct as if she had a limp in both legs. Maybe it was just the wind— the tornado—which blew the window in. MARG And suddenly she had her halo and her glistening head of glass.
   Uncle Balt wasn’t deaf. I think he was loud because he was alone. He was a silo . . . sunk in the ground like those missiles would be. His words came, it must have seemed to him, from so far away they needed to be bugled.
   He owned the farm. It was his land, and he knew every dirty inch exactly the way those men who farm in films are supposed to. He never displayed any tenderness toward it, no particular affection; yet he tended it, all right, strode over it winter and summer, rode over it spring and fall; always in the fields alone, without any kind of companion, dogless even when he went gunning for pheasant or grouse; outside like one of his few trees ... a root released from the ground.
   His wife had died before I was born (I never even knew her name), and my grandparents, who weren’t grandparents then, came to live with him and help out on the farm. “Help out” is how they put it, but I suspect (though just when I began to suspect it, I certainly can’t recall) that it was my Uncle Balt who had done the helping. It was my mother's myth that her parents were gentry, but
whatever they’d had was gone without a crazed plate or piece of lace or the ruin of a chair to reminisce the loss when I knew them. Then Uncle Balt’s one joke suggested that he felt unhappily re-related. Maybe he had some long-standing resentment of his sister. It is discouraging to leave the past behind only to see it coming toward you like the thunderstorm which drenched you yesterday. Anyway, the joke was that the women never worked, only left droppings about like pigeons: pecked and cooed and preened. They kept company with coffee cups and a few cookies as though they were engaged; they sat around kitchen tables and chatted continually, now and then picking up a crumb with a moistened fingertip or underlining something they were saying by indenting the oilcloth with the edge of a spoon or a knife. If he had lived in the city, Uncle Balt would have described how women shopped or played bridge; and if he had lived into my time, he’d have shouted about their eternal tennis and their golf. In any case, the joke went on and on, in this version or that, past boredom into cruelty, scaring away any other kind of conversation like a schoolyard bully.
   Uncle Balt would have called it “joshing.” LESS SOUL THAN A CROW. His head would bob. NO KNITTIN, JUST NAl'l ERIN, is one way he put it. On Sunday it was CHITCHAT IN A HAT; it was DITHERIN AMONG THE DUSTY DOILIES; on weekdays it was BUTTERIN THE BEE’S BUZZ; it was GOSSIPIN A GUTFUL, or GETTIN FAT ON CHAT; it was CHICKIN PICKIN and FRYIN GAB. I gathered he could become obscene, but something about trading tit-milk was the worst I heard. I knew a line of some kind had been crossed when granny would say, severely, shut. A bob of Uncle Balt’s head, as if to say “yup,” would follow instantly, but I never knew what the “yup” was a yes to. THEYLL HOPPER A MAN IN HALF, GRAZE YOU TO THE GROUND. Now and then he was explosive. THEYLL MAKE YOU INTO MAN JAM AND SERVE YOU ON TOAST. He’d maybe give me a small smile. DAMN IF THEY WONT. IS THEY BACK THERE MUNCHIN AWAY LIKE MOTHS IN A CLOSET? he wanted to know one day when he caught me trailing him. BEST YOU’RE HERE, NOT THERE. I DONT WANT YOU ADDIN TO THE TATTLE RATTLE. YOU BE AROUND WIMMIN LONG, BOY, AND BONES IS ALL YOU'LL BE. BONES WITHOUT ANY MARROW, BOY, STRAWS WITH ALL THE SUCK OUT, BONES, BOY, THEY PLAY SONGS ON, THE DEVIL’S DITTIES. He seemed himself a pure translucency, the sun shining through to him as though he were a saint all of a sudden.
   None of what he said was so, of course—not close. My grandmother slaved. That’s how everybody (except Uncle Balt) had decided to speak of her life. She scrounged; she scrimped; she saved; she slaved. Uncle Balt didn’t see a slave, naturally enough, in her sturdy square shape, but he knew she was all the standard things; god fearin, hard workin; she grew a good kitchen garden; she
cooked solid starchy things; she canned and preserved and put up; she washed and cleaned and darned and made her own clothes—a regular pioneer, my father said, though I remember it was said sourly. Uncle Balt found it fun never to say so; never to acknowledge anything positive from her presence; to shout precisely the opposite right into the wedge of pie he would soon be nuzzling under the flap of his napkin. I remember being told that Uncle Balt had false teeth. Maybe they came loose when he chewed.
   Well, Uncle Balt toiled too. It was life itself—to Uncle Balt—to work. Daybreak to sundown. Season to season. But Uncle Balt (I’d say now) worked for himself, and owned what he made; gave away what he chose; while my grandmother had a few clothes and some fat at her hips and a faraway brat to show for her labors: a dress for buttering a bee’s buzz, a dimpled butt for softening a wagon’s seat, a dipsomaniacal daughter to disappoint her life. Uncle Balt enjoyed her stove, her iron, her hoe; but Uncle Balt (I guess 1 must mention) hadn't asked for her help, her sacrifices, her moist eyes, her resigned sighs, her patience, her pallid personality, her folded soul. My grandparents were strays he’d taken in, and now he had to suffer their services, their suffering, their simple presence, their bulk. There were no more empty rooms or silent days; there were my grandfather’s night-groans, his uncomfortable cough, his tromp, my grandmother’s darning egg or embroidery hoop in Father Bear’s Chair; there was pipe ash and stale smoke and one more car with its unaccountable coming and going; there was squabbling behind doors, silly chitchat, glooms; there was no calm, there was instead that kid, Margaret, with a gaze as loose as a pond leaf, her skinflint husband, anger like a scar disfiguring his face; and then there was the kid’s kid, too, come to visit—me—running after him even out of doors, breaking the peace.
   To lose a wife and regain a sister -I- husband +.is to multiply the loss.
   Uncle Balt had apparently resolved to grouse only in areas where there was no real room or reason for it; in that way his crabbing would be like a standing joke, and my grandparents could never argue ingratitude, or complain of his complaining themselves; and in fact it might have been a shy man’s thank-you, an inverted acknowledgment, the tease’s praise; for he would insist a row be hoed only when it had been; a bed be made only when a dime danced on the coverlet; that food be prepared only when the sideboard sagged from bowls and platters of it; that a room be cleaned after the floors were carefully swept; but by god and nevertheless, his actions insisted, 1 have much to complain of, and complain I shall; 1 have violated rights; I have onerous duties; I shall not niggle or nag about it; 1 shall give orders even though my orders are empty; I shall rail and rage; I shall shout. I want you a hollersworth away, these shouts said.
   So he held them at bay; he remained remote, out on his own, with a lunch he would pack at breakfast in a pail, when he didn’t drive off with a couple of the
hands he hired on to harvest because they were working the north and the north was near town. Then he ate pancakes and drank whiskey in a big booth and bar so dark you couldn’t see the sunrise, the new men grinning because Uncle Balt had insisted 1 take a taste, and I’d stuck the tip of my tongue into the shot glass as if it were a snake’s mouth, making the expected face. I’d been taken along because—what the hell—he'd be working with these other men anyway, so there d be no solitude to shatter, pleasure to spoil. Why not, if the kid wants to come? But now I know it was because the storm's blam had blown my mother’s wits away, it seemed, and she was being taken off to a hospital somewhere in that road-rulered emptiness ... to a bed by a cornstalk was how I saw it.
   Strange he should drink the day they dressed the drunk up and argued her out of his house; and she never did darken his door again, as they say, because that wind put an unpeaceful period to our visit. I was stood in a corner with some cousins for a while, so we never did return to the farm, though I saw Uncle Balt now and then at various family get-togethers: that is, always—though alone—alone with relations; dragged there by what compunctions I can’t imagine; still protected by his formulas WE ARE BEIN SMOTHERED BY A HAYLOAD OF SKIRT SKITTER! HOW CAN A MAN REMAIN SANE WITH ALL THIS GABBLE AND GEESE HISS GOIN ON AROUND HIM? like a wire fence, silent inside his shouts as a cyclone. EVER SEE THE WAY IT COMES OUT OF A TRAIN? LIKE LIVIN IN LIVE STEAM!
   I wondered how he would get to granny with my mother gone, since he had always addressed himself to either me or Margaret, never said his sister’s name to my knowledge, left granddad strictly alone as if he didn’t exist, which was almost the case; so with just the three of them what would he do? call out to the weeded rows directly, yell at the tidy rooms and clean bare halls? He didn’t refer to my father either, but the circumstances of my father’s life had turned him into a tight coil of fury and frustration, and who wants to stir up even a chicken if it hankers to be a snake? Uncle Balt had hollered MARGARET instead, and spoke to her as if she were a crowd. The wind had torn her name in two like a ticket. There was glass in the pocket of her blouse and her lashes glittered.
   The dust ruined him, the hoppers grazed him to the ground, the hail threshed him flat, and finally my grandparents left to find work with some cornflake company in Minneapolis—the two of them—in an office full of hum and fluorescence. It was rumored that granny was a char. The farm became as isolated as my uncle then. Even the dirt died. And the deep life inside him, what did it do when the wind blew across him: hoo like an owl?
   Anyhow, Uncle Balt has yielded me a metaphor for Being, makeshift maybe, but an image in the form of a tall dark column of damp air, hole going nowhere—yes—wind across the mouth of a bottle. At dawn, dusk, and din-
ner—about as often as the barnyard cat—that’s when I saw him. He really was a man shaped of absence, and must have made love, when he had to, by continued and fervent uncoupling. One saw he had the intangible integrity of a hollow, a well’s heavy wet deficiencies. Yet at ten, that morning hour of my life, what could I have seen but the exotic: his shoelace mustache, his great gruff voice, that stern amused glare in his knuckled face, those giant strides which took him, always, away. Did he think he was an early pioneer, and hadn’t he realized how the settlers were imprisoned in space, crowded together in sod huts, rude shacks, as though on rafts—the hostile ocean everywhere?
   Naturally, no well can exist apart from the firm walls which round it—stones wedged in place like city neighbors—nor those walls be without their usual moss and mildew, either, their ancient echoes, small frogs; so I suppose we were necessary too, otherwise Uncle Balt would simply have been at work in the fields, not in flight from his family; and I feel sure that, while his muscles were lost in their labor, his consciousness considered us and how we hemmed him like a hankie; because his crabbing had calculation; it was composed like a headline; it even somewhat artfully alliterated; it had a little of the ringmaster's rodomontade; so I’m compelled to think that such independence, such isolation, such chosen loneliness, such transcendence, couldn’t exist, since no well can exit the walls which surround it—but I try to imagine emptiness uprooted, nevertheless, air rising like drawn water, a desperate turning as one beset by many enemies might turn and whirl in self-defense—a furious energy, then, containing a calm and silent center. . . from nothing, Nothing coming like the climax of an ardent woman.
   Uncle Balt desired the impossible, all right. He wanted to live like a mountain man on this endlessly level plain, as out of place in his hopes as a Mongolian. Later on in my life I would come to understand the difference between a term and a relation. Uncle Balt was a term.
   To have her hair combed, my mother sat on a chair in the middle of newspapers the way mine was placed when mine was cut. A faint smile had been bled on her face (by granny, I suspect), but it was Uncle Balt, to my surprise, who was drawing the comb carefully toward him, the glass accumulating in the tines like the finest sand. It wouldn’t be long before dust would invest him too, coat the whole house—land, crops, grass—-as though the sky had exploded. In her last years my mother would powder her face, lay pallor upon pallor until it was as white as it looked then, a character in Kabuki ... ah, there I go. Upon my mother's face that day he placed his wide and knobby hand to steady her head while he pulled the comb one final time through her already thinning hair, and I half expected his palm to come away white as if it had been put down in a patch of paint.
   Uncle Balt used to disappear after dinner, but occasionally he’d dawdle in the garden or go to the barn or something before walking off toward the applause of the wheat as he usually did, and 1 would sort of hover; but I never saw him do anything really interesting, maybe cut from his plug a thin slice of tobacco to slip in his mouth, which he certainly wasn’t supposed to do (filthy habit, granny said, let the hoppers spit if they must, it sits well with their needs and nature); and that also might be why he held a napkin in front of his face at table: either the stains showed on his false teeth, or he felt guilty now when he chewed anything at all.
   What else?
   Once, while 1 was hiding in the barn loft from the Secret Agents of the Underworld, or some similarly diabolical enemy, Uncle Balt came in and carefully selected a burlap bag from a stack he had collected, but what was odd, and it was the only thing, was the loud monotonous hum 1 heard.
   There’s nothing to be made of it, really. 1 might have wondered whether, out of the depths of the man, there rose from time to time the sound of a soul singing . . . but oh boy there I go . . .
   Yesterday, before the rain arrived, the wind began to rattle furiously through the cornfield. I could hear it in my study like hundreds of snapping flags. Out there, in that world—that life—one stalk, like the one I had imagined standing by my mother’s bed, counts for nothing, only in the mass is it fruitful, and the dust, only in clouds containing trillions is it murderous and terrifying; ants, bees, baboons, live in families for similar reasons; and I remembered, upon hearing that jingonizing sound, how Uncle Balt, pulling the silk down to examine the quality of kernel his corn bore, had stood inside the field like a Self . . . or so it seems to me now in my search for a symbol, some sense for my silly situation SEEKS SOME SENSE IN HIS SILLY SITUATION Yes, good god.
   Let the hoppers spit if they must, granny had insisted, they masticate enough, it sits well with their needs and nature. It sounded to me as though a terrible thing had been said. At ten, I don’t think I had ever encountered the word ‘masticate’ before, so 1 was surprised to hear that sentence coming from grandmother with the force and intent of a judgment, for it was a judgment. Whatever it meant.
   Suddenly I see a dab of warm brown juice in one corner of Uncle Balt’s mouth as if tucked in there, and the tip of something larger the way the wheat and oat heads poked out of the little pockets of his overalls.
   My mother sat up stiffly enough through the combing although she looked faint and her red smile didn’t move. Then she went slowly up the stairs on my uncle’s arm with scarcely a glance at its cardboarded window.
   In my memory, Uncle Balt has a stern straight look but no eyes. It is also— I mean my shallow memory—unfamiliar with the thickness of his hair or how,
if at all, it was “styled.” (How distant that fashionable word is from any history of his life.) What else? His shoes were high and black and laced by means of cleats. You might think you were tying up a ship. White cotton socks oozed out of his shoetops like soda foam. You might think, in such a sandy soil, the past would be easy to dig up. Well, Uncle Balt was a loud tall bitterly beknuclded farming man whose head struck with force when he spat. I distinctly see his spittle darkening the dust in long loose streaks like glacial lakes on maps. Then there was that little bob like a bob of a duck which may have meant "yup." The Iongjohns he wore were always only somewhat soiled. And now he’s gone. I’m half, and the past half of me remembers him. His hands were huge and emerged from the ends of his arms broad as brooms. He wore no rings, no watch, and so no chain, no fob, no jewelry or charms, unless you counted his mustache, which he did say once was grown of nose hair and ear wax. One of the cats had had kittens and Uncle Balt said he was taking them to a neighboring farm where they could lead a fine and useful barnyard life. My mother put her hand on my head/neck/back—tip, tip, tap—lightly like a benediction, sanding my skin with glass. She had come down the stairs as if balancing her body on the end of its nose, and I had scooted from beneath the table, reddening my knees on the rough nap of the rug, to cling to her legs for dear life— hers or mine, I’m not sure. It was like clutching a curtain. In the rug were woven ancient vases done in ivory. Ten is a lowered-eye, base age.
  Shortly Uncle Balt was yelling: EVER HEAR OF WORK, YOUNGSTER? He spelled it. W. O. R. K.—A STRANGER TO YOU, BETCHA. WANT TO GET ACQUAINTED WITH IT? LOSE OUT ON ALL THE LA-DI-DAHIN AND THE LOCAL TOAST SOAK THOUGH, IF YOU DO.
  I wanted to lose out. I wanted to lift myself from my red knees and float from that place like the wind itself had—disappear as thin air. I agreed by jumping up and down—how like a puppy—and so the following morning I had to lower my face and put my tongue down in that poison that was killing my mother, tasting it, making the expected face, amusing those men, the sun not yet up in the bar. Then we rode out on ruts to where the tractor and combine had been left like pieces of junk. The water in the water jars was warm; the sandwiches were gray and dry; the morning sun had stopped to talk with the wimmin and seemed never to reach noon; the smell of wheat was everywhere in the warm wind; and Uncle Balt went comfortably on through the day behind the roar of the machines.
  Gin probably made my mother s head hum too. Certainly the world loosened its grip, fluttered a bit. I know that much now. But at pissy age ten the glass was like dry particles of some former creature sifting down my back, the rug rougher than towel, her legs like an arm sleeping under a pillow, those rug urns the pale shape of the visible world.
   And when I felt all there was was the blood bunched up and beating in my belly, wasn’t 1 right?
   I do keep wondering whether it was the same for my mother as for Uncle Balt—that withdrawal—and whether mine is like either of theirs. I am more than distant from those days. I am distance itself. The advantage of gin is that it looks like water. 1 stand alone on an empty page like a period put down in a snowfall. They coat Christmas tree ornaments with glitter like that which fell upon my mother. Well, where is the love that does not make more trouble, Rilke once wrote to a friend; and I am reminded of the unfriendly gift at Easter of a rabbit I couldn't care for or bear to destroy, and how it left its droppings nervously along the baseboards and behind chairs; because 1 understand Rilke: love is an act of acquisition—a takeover bid—and Uncle Balt didn't wish to be acquired—not by his sister or relations, not by kittens crawling over my legs and lap, not by social duties, not by his fields or any element of nature. In a trap, he was ready to chew off a limb. I wonder whether my mother saved what little life she had by driving herself through a fog of drink toward that eventual rebirth in oblivion, or whether it was life itself, her own soft soul, passive as a pudding, she wished release from. The latter is the usual hypothesis. It is the hypothesis of society. 1 quote a poet against it, but I should not put a poet between us. Or tendentious philosophical concepts. Or schemes out of history. My mother, father, Uncle Balt: first I must understand them, before 1 can understand them; and the difficulty is that I only want to understand myself, which is what I do when I interpose the poet like a napkin between you—that is, them—their lives—you, yes—and my mind’s ruminating mouth.
   But Uncle Balt got his wish. He lived his death in solitude, without having to suffer the mercies of the church, or the solicitude of the moist eye, the spooks who gather about your bed to tell jokes as long as their faces: soon you will have no desires they can deny; soon the servant in you will have carried out their last request; there will be one less to pain or complain of—how it saddens them; and even my father thought he felt bad when my mother died, in her asylum, in solitude too, her blood leaking back into her body through her throat.
   But Uncle Balt got his wish. I have a picture of him there on that lonely farm, the sky like soil, dirty with one disaster after another, yelling at the elements, maybe; for by now the world must have become a woman for him, nibbling away at his life, bossing his mouth, wearing the paint from his house, thinning his skin, darkening everything by degrees with dust—boy am I in for it—and the hail like bullets falling onto those apparently applauding stalks, crops grazed to the ground, eaten up and hammered down into a stubble the wind will shave.
   Surely he must have realized in those final years that his wish had been granted ironically, as so many are in fairy tales, for now he was alone with the
grandparents of us everywhere; because when the early myths described creation, didn’t they suggest a mating of the earth and sky? and what better image of that copulation is there than the funnel of wood and straw and dust the tornado’s excited suction shapes: a column according to its outer edges, the classic figure of the phallus; then vaginal on its inner rims, in its windings, hollows, shell-like lips?
   Kids from the Conservation Corps, I gather, discovered him. He fell climbing over a fence, they said. The wind blew a bed of dust around him. He’d snapped a leg and consequently fainted. That is their conjecture. Who knows how strong he was by then; how well he’d slept or eaten; or even if he had been faithful to the fields in his former fashion, without the need to rush away from granny’s house—as it then had become—in anxiety, disgust, or anger? Disgust. Maybe that’s why he ate with a napkin like a loincloth covering his mouth. Slowly silted up the way sand buries a beach, he’d been in his grave near a month when the boys dug him up. He hadn’t ripened much. He and his world were eternal as Egypt. Until they found him, I’m willing to bet, his hair had blown lazily about like those heads of oat and wheat he’d picked to check the progress of the crop.
   Even then, though, with Uncle Balt's body returning to the dust in the most appropriate biblical way, wasn’t that enormous voice of his perhaps composing a final cry of help at having fallen? wasn’t it still far away inside him like something planted—a seed of sound—and might it not break out one day when an innocent spade turns a clod like a cork? to pop forth at the end of that word he was completing?
                                           jARET!
   Well, there 1 go.
   I had put the kittens in the center of a spread of papers, but the papers had been scarcely peed on when Uncle Balt carried the kittens away. He was swift, almost deft, about it. I was farmed out with cousins who were quite congenial. That summer didn’t end so badly, and my mother came around . . . part way.
   At ten, what can one be expected to see, or seize upon, or comprehend? And at my present age and anger, what can I unreservedly remember or deservedly forgive? At ten, though I might have found him odd, I bet a buck I thought that Uncle Knuckle was a lot of fun.
   Sing, Susu, through your severed head, through your severed arteries; and 1 shall put my mouth to your lips as though you were such an instrument. My breath shall reinflate your brain. Susu, O bag of pipes, 1 approach you in my dreams.
             Mad Meg
  Mad Meg smiles. He has the hot mouth of a lit pumpkin. There are reasons more terrible than tigers. His smile is jagged like sharded glass. Storefronts were burning. A band played in a back street. O Kohler, he says, crowds—these masses in the plaza—all of those sweaty heads below the scented hands and front porch of the pope—this hill of the European ant—how do you manage them? Kohler? Do you speak to their expectations? Ex-PECT-ations. What a joke! The only expectations all these creatures have in common's common death. Even with the greatest good will, we can’t give to everyone that gift. They must wait in line for it. Kohler? Do you grant them what they want, if you would govern these whiny widdlepissers, do you? The young, the old, the farmers, miners, haberdashers, aging maidens: do you find them out as the Philosopher in his Rhetoric suggests? do you? their dumpy bums and dangling dinguses, do you? They’d have barbecued Christ’s bones if they had twigged to the thought of it and had the sauce—these—these anchovies, these sauerkrauts, these little lilliputzers. O no. Aristotle’s suggestion spoke to a community, a community of citizens, to a community of—Gracious Heaven—Greeks! Nertz, then, I say to his cozy notion. Make no such anthropod inquiries, Kohler. It’s futile. It’s sappy. You must make them want what you—what you— want them to want, and then you speak to that. Let Aristotle chew his nose. Let it droop in disappointment like a Jew’s. But how is it possible to manage the masses so easily, you ask? and don’t you gnaw to knows it? Hah! Like grease, cold or hot, they’ll assume any shape. Ah, I see doubt on your face like an unseemly smudge of self-restraint. Well, nothing’s simpler, Kohler, don’t be dense. Everything’s in them already . . . already . . . isn’t that nice? Every desire has its own fat seed and every seed its dirty place. I don’t exclude their embrace of misery, their need for lovelessness, their liking for their fallen lot. They revel in the ruins of themselves. Despair they embrace like a whore—with some revulsion, but with their cocks sticking out nevertheless. Ignorance they worship, along with wisdom. Don’t only the ignorant worship wisdom? Yah, hah, drunkenness is sought as well as temperance; the same throat will wallow in wine and swallow dust. O I exclude nothing, including Nothing itself, which is extravagantly loved. Kohler, merely make water on the ones you want to grow. Be careful with your aim, though, Kohler; don’t wet too widely or they'll all sprout. His teeth fade like the cat’s grin. The skullshell softens sud-
denly. I hunt for a book, for a smoke, stretch my fingers out, at last allow both hands a brief yawn in my lap. Kohler, Tabor shouts, his mouth now swallowing my ear: men! Men are full moons—always—regardless of the phase they’re in. But didn’t your own Bard warn you? of the silvery sorts, the thin and thinly shaven, the lightly curved as Cassius was, who did not shine more than a doxy’s slit, who pretend they are nothing more than a parted lid, an eye not quite awake? ah, they’re the ones to watch—to watch with a wide eye—to watch as though they were the most artful fobbers—to watch as though every tock were your watch’s last!
                         The Ghost Folks
  Who is not in league? The children waddle toward me, blue pants on the bigger one, yellow on the other. I lift them on the train. Away we go! Whee! We shall ride all day and eat lunches out of the same sacks the kids keep their crayons in. Orange peels will enliven the aisle, and our wan and bent reflections will float over a landscape which streams behind us more rapidly than any river. We are going to visit your father’s family, Marty tells the children. How can they know what that means? They cannot realize to what profound degree the adults are conspiring against them. Night of long knives. Night of crystal. It means, heigh-ho, and away we go! It means whee! It will mean more later when they stand in a strange stultifying room to stare at a cripple who grimaces at them through a row of colored bottles, muttering “Ah, then, there they are,” or "Well then where’s the car?” or something else they’re not sure they should respond to, so they become as passive as a pair of Indians or anyone who knows that to reveal your feelings is to bare your breast for a blow you are already too weak to receive or endure, much less manage to return.
  It will mean more, but the low close meanness in the meaning like a narrow door, old animosities like flies dead in the swatter’s screen—away we whee!— and the stinging spitefulness in the meaning, the nest of snakes and needles there, the clamping fear, the lovelessness in the meaning like brackish tea, the serious signals in the meaning (cancer coming like a train, foul prophecy, sour sugar, star-crossed cards), and although grouped like a chorus of groans, the bitter omens in the meaning will still pass them by like the deadly angel, for had I not marked them with a bloody X? and only the senselessness of it all will be evident—heigh-ho!—only the abrupt unsocketing of their life will be evident. The sudden outrage—that will be evident. And my mother, her gray hair
like a web she’s run into, will say, My, aren't they dear; how far along are they in school? They’re not in school, yet, mother. They’re only two and four. Well, four and a half, actually, and ... My mother will sigh. Too bad, poor things, not in school, so sad. A single fat tear will run quickly across her cheek as though a blister had broken; and we shall only that moment have crawled awkwardly from our cab, the front door of the house will still be standing open, bags beneath my hands like movie props, powder will be lying in the creases of my mother’s face like snow, her voice wet and wandering, blurry as her gaze, Marty’s eyes will ice, and 1 shall be ... I shall be in a rage.
  1 waddle down the hall through the dirty light of Sunday toward what I hope will be an empty office, but 1 hear voices through the gray glass and see a shadow—monstrous—which must be Planmantee, so I alter course to pass on down the stairs as secretly as the rest of my dingy discipline does; and 1 realize, while I'm bumping down the steps like a runaway ball, that as strange and contradictory as my colleagues’ views of history are, they each think of time as something which rises like a kite, never as something pulled out straight or stretched flat like dough, and certainly never as seeking the sea like a river, thus running down as a watch would, either (for time is eternal to them, unlike the instrument), but that was certainly how 1 saw it: not falling like a tower—nothing so grand or dramatic, so thunderous or catastrophic—but sifting and seeping, piddling itself away as one wastes a Sunday just as I was doing, going for my mail and finding colleagues in conclave before my box; so 1 suspect my sons will turn away from me less abruptly than I did from my father, more like leaves revolve toward the light through one cloud-spotted day.
  And Oscar Planmantee, my unsung theme song, my nemesis, says, Suppose events were really more like things than we think; suppose events could be broken in bits like bread; suppose, like when you break bread you reach a crumb you can no longer credit, as if you’d gone past the beaten wheat, the yeast, into the cell itself, then you'd have to back up, right? because you would have sharpened your pencil past its point—haven’t I put it precisely?-—you’d have to adjust your sense of divisibility until you got the right part into the right whole, right? you bet, Bill boy, and then you’d have the ultimate element, and that’s what we want, the basic bill, the changeless penny; that’s what we need to secure for history an honest footing; and when I think back on these things (my summer spell of peace, those visits to the West and to the East, my birthplace in Iowa, home in Ohio, the brats we brought up, the succulent tits of my sow, this flood of bitterness which washes over me every seven minutes like plagues visited upon a speeded-up pharaoh), 1 wonder whether it is only pain
which has parts, for my patches of happiness seem continuous, complete, so warmly substantial everywhere, like a mouth wet with wine, while my father’s house is nothing but hunks, shards, tatters: rooms and parts of rooms, furniture falling to pieces like dry fruitcake, sun-faded draperies, raddled unretractable shades, cracked knickknacks, broken baskets, lifeless linens, small doughnut-holed cushions for resting the ass, wedge-shaped cushions for holding up the head, long broad pillows for propping up the back, cylindrical ones for raising the feet and legs which Carl will promptly use to give his brother a whack, then plastic trays that stack and chairs with steel wheels and crowds of bottles we will have to watch like cops to keep the kids from sampling, each with little red-rimmed labels crossed with tiny typewritten symbols for hrs and amts, along with words like codeine and gold salts and cortisone, the letter o, 1 notice, in each of them, with the plain white blank it circles, and then I think that maybe in there I won’t feel anything, but my kids are bewildered by their surroundings, frightened, soon they are talking too loudly, and Carl’s voice has a peculiar rising scoop to it which signifies hysteria.
   I can’t blame them, though I will hate them anyway for vibrating at such a pitch when what I need is calm—-actually, what I need is total obliteration, now—now that we have the bomb, we can all be blown back into our original pieces with one clean disintegration, instead of being pulled apart slowly with dental pliers. And what is the ultimate element in history but human life— human coupling, human pain? Planmantee grabs his nose. There’s a bad smell coming from my mind, like a stopped drain. Human life? human suffering? simply a random set of deviations from a nonexistent norm. We average that out, he says.
   Consciousness, I say, consciousness is what counts. Like the butterfly in the killing jar, he says, consciousness is soon stilled.
            They Should Live So Long:
                     The Old Folks
  Heigh-ho! And we took our kids from their backyard, where there was a little swing, from their friendly beds, and all their toys, and put them down— weren’t we whirlwinds, really?—on this dusty threadbare rug, this small room crowded with furniture, footstools meeting in the middle like hills, say hello to your grandfather, Carl, and your grandmother, too, yes—hello, mother, do you
remember the children’s names? these are the pants which auntie made, aren't they darling? and are you feeling any better, father? the weather too wet? gets the knees, 1 bet, fists the knuckles, crimps the elbows, turns up toes; and I suppose there were reasons for our coming—causes beyond guilt—the thought repeated like a lesson: but they want to see them, the Old Folks, sure, they have never seen their grandkids, all these years, though nobody asked mum how she was feeling because even falling down drunk she was supposed to be fine; her drinking was a secret from everybody, especially herself, because the gin got by her in the guise of tap water, swallowed gargle, as nasal spray unaccountably misdirected, under cover of cures for the nerves which steadily grew unsteadier, and thus required stronger, straighter doses, longer swigs, more frequent spoons; and she mostly ate Life Savers to sweeten her breath, and chewed limes, took tincture of iodine in prudent drops to ward off the goiter which wasn’t coming, and to strengthen the blood which gushed out uncontrollably at her periods sometimes, the color of bourbon, one reason why we stayed away; but after all, Marty, we so rarely visit, and they have never seen our sons (how could they?), and that's a shame; you’ve said hello not once since our marriage, not once since our marriage, Marty, do you think that’s often enough? even though the bloodstains on the rug drive you bats, and it’s the first place you’ll throw your eyes like a gauntlet when you barge in with your shopping sack through the door to discover whether they’re still there, which of course they will be, because things rot where they’re dropped in that house, nature has taken over like lassitude in the tropics, anyhow the stains are not too noticeable against the worn wine border and the leaflike design so admired twenty years ago when it was laid out in [FEEMEY'S IPO ME EU^MDinUJ l^E like a work of Eastern art; nevertheless, how many times have we gone back to Iowa? even though we were both born there, you know perfectly well it’s your clan which takes us in the way an elephant sucks up water with his trunk—so, say, half a dozen? since our marriage . . . our marriage which took place before thousands—relatives, connections, friends, the friends of friends, tradesmen, farmers—hordes heard us read over, saw the ring encircle your finger like a sore, witnessed the first connubial kiss, and hug too, delivered like a package; and thus fortified with the Sacraments of Holy Mother Church, June i (June 1, naturally), 1940 (to kiss off one decade and kick off another), William Frederick Kohler, beloved by nobody but dear son of Frederick Karl Kohler and Margaret Phelps Finney, sometimes known as Feeney of Feeney’s Fine Furniture (all three deceased), slid into the disembowered bed of Martha Krause Muhlenberg, dear daughter of Henry Heman Muhlenberg and Ruth Dilschneider, sweet sister of Cramer and Catherine, the latter younger by three years and already a Dallmeyer full of foal, and so almost an aunt—yes—
and certainly a dear sister-in-law who was not yet enormous, with warm creamy flesh and moist parts; and once there, even though they had fooled around with fooling around before, so that neither felt obliged to play First Night, Open Sesame, or Our Lady of Deflowers, as Culp called it, the groom’s penis pulsing as the bawdy books say . . .
                                 I once went to bed with a nun, as a Master of Arts, not for fun.
                                     She was eager to learn, and had passion to burn, and was so apt in class,
                               I put A on her ass; but she wouldn’t take credit, though she smiled when she said it: your designs may be polished,
                            Herr Prof, by your knowledge, but the smarts of your parts are homespun.
                   And in that atmosphere, Herschel ventured the opinion that history was the science of men in time. You blockhead,
                 1 thought, what do we know about time? but Governali had already shouted SCI-ENCE? as if it were pronounced ' seance, and Planmantee had brushed off mankind like a piece of lint.
Herr Husband, Herr Riclder, proceeded to fuck her for all he was worth, which wasn't much, with no house, no car, a salary of three thousand a year, a lousy job, no real prospects; and it wasn't much to ask, either; it was little enough to do for the Old Folks, and they did want to see the kids, they were grandparents, after all, and they did want to see them—the prospering consequences of our careless encunting—even though dime-store photos in fancy frames had arrived in time for unwrapping every Christmas season since the first flash had gone off in baby’s face, and somewhere in the house there was a dresser where the years stood in brightly tinted cemetery rows, their images smiling into a sickroom’s dim medicinal distances; yet now the Old Folks spoke—heigh-ho—over the children’s heads and past their persons and rattled their words around them impatiently the way you take a detour on a trip, to complete the 1-told-you-sos of their self-congratulations, recite litanies of community complaint, and utter cries of international consternation; dedicated, with the only pleasant absorption they knew, to a kind of nondenominational kvetch—catholic in taste—
Calvinist in ferocity, which seemed as perpetual as promised cemetery care, though as culturally confused as a big city street; and 1 must admit their constant keening, though of course it did not spring into being in a day but developed over years of practiced suffering and artful emotional decay, has badly influenced me, even if I don’t complain much in public, and rarely go on about my own aches and pains, although they’re real enough, or bring up the wretched lack of love I've had to endure my entire life, or cite the backbiting of my colleagues, the professional jealousy that surrounds me like a too-warm room, or the treachery of deans and other higher-ups who have denied me the Com-mager Chair—those shit-resembling administrators who wipe themselves with their memos and try, then, to hold them under my nose, the excuses they hide behind, bugs on the backside of leaves, as if the Chair had to be occupied by a specialist in American history, certainly not by a Nazi-nuzzler, well, they’re under their flimsy white reasons: toilet paper soaking in the bowl like a great coil of cloudy sky which I flush for fair weather; anyway, they went right on about their illnesses, no matter how you tried to steer things, about their mutual exasperations which thirty years of friction (like a religious war) had naturally made cancerous, their aggravations with their neighbors (shitting, barking, garbage-stealing dogs, mostly), mounting expenses (which reminds me, so the mind slides, of a dumb joke by Culp), the incompetence of all professions, including mine, the congenital laziness of the poor, the insatiable greed of labor, the piracies of business, the Communist menace, the collapse of moral standards, and the dangerous spread of the spooks and kikes; although my mother, during her last toot and ultimate toddle, was too muzzy-mouthed most of the time to form her words clearly, 1 gathered she was mostly remaking the past, enriching her family’s coffers and raising their social status, pretending that she loved her father, and so on, and had once had a rich fine life, so that she could describe her marriage as a tragic comedown (which, in its way, it had been), while advancing reasons why I should give up my position at the university, my whole world and work, to return to live with her—with them—in her spoiled womb again, to become the local superintendent of schools (her gin-soaked eyes could see no higher than the same thin rim a cocktail onion might aspire to); forgetting, with a thoroughness Freud would have put in a footnote, how (though dead a decade now) in her schooldays she had been called PP FinneyneeFeeney over and over by chanting gangs of sweet-faced, pigtailed girls, until she often burst into tears, poor Peg; for no one could understand why her father had changed his name from Feeney to Finney in the first place or why he retained the old name for his store in the second; though it was always perfectly clear to me that he was simply removing himself from the trade (he might be Feeney at the store but he was Finney at home), just as I am WFK some-
times, or Whiff Cough, or, as I used to be, Herr Rickler, in my prime; nor did she trouble to recall how humiliated she was to be dressed in upholstery remnants or the bolt ends of drapes, for her father was famously stingy, as Peggy always accused my father of being when he bawled her out for spending money foolishly; and though she said she went to dances at the country club, and moved in circles too racy for my father’s ears or understanding, no one could say, looking at her lined, pale, and puffy face, the shapeless garish sack she had double-pinned around her, or the misfocusing eyes and slack wet mouth, that she had led the right life, and she knew it, not even with Freud’s fist could she repress that, and so now in her whiskeyed age, my mother, Margaret, dreamed of fine parties and a large estate, long gowns and tail suitors, the handsome breasts of the girl she was, and enjoyed the anger of her husband, who understood the meaning of her lies—their thrust—without understanding the futility of arguing about them, as again and again he would inform her that there was no country club in the entire county during those schoolgirl days of hers, no dances, no romances, no roses; forcing his voice through the constrictions of his self-control till it rolled out flat as dough and dry as wash; but his hate had so melted his bones together he couldn’t strike or throttle her while she ran on, speaking directly to Martha of her hopes for me and my return to the old hometown, as if my wife and the children no longer had that relation.
   1 am placed in an imaginary past by this journey, but my children find nothing here, not even the present; their father’s world is too strange. They are making their memories, not living them, while Martha is resolved to let nothing in, her whole face a mask against poisonous gases. So the one-car, cream and green garage does not look pitiful to them, there is no pathos to the barren patches beneath the trees or the single tulip frond which still pushes up each spring below the eave. I sense myself in that spent bulb, and let a little sadness overlie my rage. At the shaded bottom of the yard is a gathering of stones, mud, and meager weeds which at one time was a garden made of ivy, moss, found rocks, and valley lilies we heaped up patiently. Soon now, 1 know, my aunt will unsquatter herself from the premises; my family’s simple house will empty and new life pour into it. Fresh hope will wash through the property like another rain; yet this skimpy lot and modest building will absorb these energies like China, and give only ruins in exchange.
   1 remember putting BBs through the bathroom window of the house immediately behind us. Was each BB an ultimate bit of the event as Planmantee might claim? I had fired into the air, exuberantly, like an Arab, and my father was consequently forced to redden my ears. So forty years later I remember the shots because I remember the shit that followed. It’s what this house holds out to me: a plate of swallowed fruit.
   I remember wheeling my bike from the garage and galloping away to school as though it were Arizona. I haven’t cycled since I was siphoned off to war, and I’ve never been to Arizona.
   I remember my many tame squirrels, and the hummingbirds at the honeysuckle which climbed a trellis, broken then as now, to fill the early hours of the kitchen with a sweetness like fresh bread. Its vines are presently a dead web webbed with webs. I seldom see the birds I once saw—orioles and bluebirds, wrens—and watching the rubythroats (though rarely, as I said O the thrush is gone, that golden finch, the tanager like a healed wound) I am impressed by how they barely touch life, and therefore seem so Ariel and free, supping only through a straw. Into such beautifully flown mornings we would bring our night-filled heads like loads of stinking garbage.
   I remember waiting at the top of the basement stairs to surprise my father when he opened the door by planting my playful fist in his solar plexus, and feeling my breath rush away from what I’d done as his did. What will my children remember? Even less than I? Will Carl remember how I shook the crying out of him like salt, lifting his crib and hurling it as though I were the Hercules? And will even pleasant memones be shadowed by ambiguity the way these great oaks dim the grass?
   I remember bolting through another door to encounter the giant nakedness of my mother, both of us too startled to be immediately ashamed, one of her hands scrabbling for a robe she’d just let fall; and I ran from the room just ahead of an awful slam, the sound coming after me like the clap of my own doom. I believed in doom in those days.
   They weren’t always Old Folks, of course, and I never thought of my father as my old man, despite the fact that he went in training to be Old Folks early. My mother declined the honor. Although it’s easy for an alky to be someone’s old man or lady (they have the necessary, broken-down, soft calf soul), they can’t really make it as anybody’s folks.
   Old folks, old jokes, Culp claims.
   The years were never an element, because my parents didn’t age, they simply sickened. My father was mean and cocky like Cagney all the way to the dump. Flat on his back, his bones poking this way and that like the corpses in the camps, he still had a fiery eye, as though, but for those two coals, the grate held ash. There's no easy way out of this life, and I do not look forward to the day they put those tubes up my nose, and a catheter shows my pee the way out like some well-trained servant. I saw how my father’s body broke his spirit like a match; and I saw how my mother’s broken spirit took her body under the way a ship sinks after being disemboweled by an errant berg of ice.
   My father suffered thirty years of pain. A continent could call it a war. It was an unjust fate. It was undeserved. And my mother drank for nearly the same,
although she beat my father to the grave by a good five, having decayed for a decade before they lowered her away—a leftover spoiling in the light. Fare thee well, I say, now that the words have no designation.
   My father taught me how to be a failure. He taught me bigotry and bitterness. 1 never acquired his courage, because I caught a case of cowardice from my mother—soft as cotton—and I was born with her desperate orality, her slow insistent cruelty—like quicksand—her engulfing love.
   My mother drank to fill her life with the warmth which had long ago leaked out of it; and my father hurt like hell because his mother had, because he had inherited the wrong proclivities, his arthritis an arch between two sagging generations.
   My mother drank to let down her guard and allow her dreams to flood her like the cheap enamel basin they would later furnish her to puke in; while the aspirin my father fed on put a hole in his stomach like the one 1 have, having inherited the wrong proclivities, too—passivity like pavement over a storm.
   My mother drank because, at the menopause, she missed the turn and struck a wall, her hormones went out of balance like the weights of a clock, and she couldn’t tell time anymore; while my father held two jobs, one at his architect’s office and another at the store, because the Depression practically wiped out his practice, and Feeney’s, also desperate, took him in at a family rate to let two others starve, and changed its name at the same time to IFHHIMIHITS F/SiKUDlDif              not so much to honor my father’s pres-
ence as to justify the junk the store now stocked; and there he worked long heartless hours, a foot backward in its shoe, filling the blank side of unused bills of sale with plans for gingerbread houses, garages too grand for their cars, gas stations designed as castles, banks like forts, stores in the cute shape of their specialty (often shoes), bars which were made entirely of glass brick, churches which were all spire, and little neighborhoods which were nothing but wall; then, as the world began to recover, my father’s wasted efforts having bled his strength, he began to decline, and soon couldn’t draw anymore, and soon couldn’t sell sofas either, only sit in them, until they became too low and soft and mortal for him, his cane like a tree towering over him, his strength only in the grit of his jaws, in a mean streak now grown green and brave.
   My mother had no steel. All puff—though sensitive—she was a cotton wad, and powdered her nose instead of washing it, and painted her nails instead of cleaning and cutting them, though when her hand shook, color crossed the cuticle, and sometimes the tips of her fingers were red. So she drank to the point of suicide, because a life which not only lacked love, but couldn’t even catch a little indifference, like a net to contain air, was intolerable; because she hadn’t a single god, or goddamn thing to do, or anything she could look back
on as done—completed or accomplished—only one pleasureless screw which produced an ingrate and a monster upon whom she nevertheless pinned her hopes with exactly the same chance for success as anyone would who tried to drive a nail into a passing cloud—a son to whom she threw her soul at considerable peril, like a stone into a paper boat.
   So my mother drank in order to die, but made her dying such a disagreeable, drawn-out business, and aimed it so deviously, like a draft or deep-sea current, that it became my father’s dying too. They must have both woke, if they slept, with the sense of imprisonment so strong in them (as though they had lain with a sachet of damp stones), what other sense—sound, sight, taste—could they have? tuned only to entrapment: she in her habit and household and husband, and he in himself, his wife’s decay like the bad smell one employs to cover a bad smell.
   Peg nursed at a poisonous nipple; she drank to fill herself with a milk malevolent enough to do her husband in if he ever thought to feed from her breasts again, in punishment for having suckled insufficiently before, and he ached in order not to Othello her with a whoopee cushion (or was I the object of their clever plans?); while my small aunt sat on her bed above them like a bird in a tree, boxes of nested boxes beneath her springs, and waited for both of them to melt away, and the weather to change. Well, so did I, though 1 was blunter and less hypocritical about it ... 1 waited for them to leap from one another like cliffs—heigh-ho, and away we go—I waited for them to bludgeon one another into shapeless heaps, to stab with what points were left, to let go of life and sink inside each other like meeting seas or a struggling swimmer, to smother ... I waited for them to die.
                             I once went to bed with a nun, who had screwed every nation but one.
                                 I don’t want to Russia, but your Pole feels like Prussia-far too Chile—to Finnish the pun.
                  And in that atmosphere, Herschel ventured the opinion that history was the self-knowledge of the mind. A birdcall on a wooden whistle, I thought, what do we know about knowledge? but Governali had already cried SELF? as if it were pronounced wealth, and Planmantee had buried mind like a mangy cat.
   My kids will not come to visit me. We have broken the chain. And Governali says the Chinese were clever when they worshiped their ancestors, because
they were really reverencing a true model of time—a model based on begetting, as Plato taught; but 1 did not become my children. I spat them out like pits and they grew up as near and yet apart from me as weeds in a row of beans.
   My mother became me, though—that’s true. She shrank as I grew large. Despite the fact that 1 was in Germany sharpening my claws, learning lessons she could not have begun to understand; nevertheless, I knew she referred to me incessantly, twisted her recollections of my now stout yet little knickered self like an anxious hankie. My activities had superseded and replaced hers; I was the principal figure in her fantasies, a shadow cast by her departed pride; so—yes, it was true—the life she had, such as it was, was only the life she dreamed for me, inaccurate and irrelevant as that was. I was her movie’s movie star. When I stepped out of the cab, then, 1 came as the new superintendent of schools, parading down the avenues of my early education; and there were no lines in her script for these strangers she didn’t want to see like flies beside me, whom she refused to acknowledge or focus on, and whom I’d brought along because of the wish I pretended she had like any conventional grandmomma or dad.
   At first I was surprised by her designs, her hopes for me, as though a seamstress should dream her son would be a bank teller not a banker, a druggist, not a dancer. Her aim was too low to have been aimed at, and there seemed to be little connection between her life and the life she sought for me. But when 1 allowed my thoughts to sink like a spoon in a pudding through the long cold evenings I spent with a then unmuddled Margaret at our oilcloth-covered kitchen table, collecting cuttings for a scrapbook about Egypt or memorizing "The shades of night were falling fast” or doing sums, stumbling through Latin declensions or getting lost among the puzzling certainties of geometry or rushing through a novel’s meaning like a train, the ground of her life with me seemed to dictate the building she envisioned; for it was my mother who was the architect in our family, and as I hammered another line of Tennyson or Whittier in my head, turning up the silence in my sulks until my mother had to clap her hands over her ears and audibly protest, I was a window or a doorway or a wall which wouldn’t stay in plumb, a leaning chimney, a poorly pitched roof, and she patiently redrew me, propped and pushed, until, through another day at school at least, I stood—indeed I peaked, 1 steepled on occasion. So when I left for college, she had nothing left, but had to linger on in that painful house, unfortunately more alone in my aunt’s and father’s company than ever in her own.
   The fact that I was still in school, a professor of history in a huge if not distinguished university, with a Ph.D. like an abbreviation on one of my father’s painkill bottles, was of no significance at all to her, because I was no longer in her educational system, the world she had helped me move through like a dancer’s mum—no—I was far away in history, the ever-enlarging Holocaust,
the horrors of the human, as though it were another time and country, as it often was while 1 was studying the past, worshiping my heroes, or, later, warring on, then screwing in, Germany.
   Eventually it came back to me like a letter 1 had no memory of writing, much less putting in the mail: that her father had been, among other things, superintendent of schools in rural Iowa—the czar of something like two buildings and six rooms—and the historical force of this fact depressed me, as if an insignificant and innocent situation, by becoming the simplest sort of symbol, had triumphed despite its accompanying support, as if it were the one gun in the gang to coerce cash from the teller. Born blind, darkness follows forever; with a limp, one always perceives the world from aboard a rolling ship; and was the little wishbone, then, the single stanchion of the human spirit?
   My own bones are old folks now. I remember how I faced the absurdity of my fate. 1 stood in a pool of cold and urine-yellow sunlight one early autumn afternoon, a sweater’s empty arms around my neck, closing the family album on my children, one soft black page against another like the dark in which I’d mount my succeeding days; face dry, tight, smileless, smooth as an apple’s skin, while I counted the overlapping shadows of their heavy steps when they went with their luggage to the car and drove away toward college as though it were Africa (it took ten strides, ten silhouettes like played cards); for I realized that I would never sleep straight through another night again; that my belly would wake me, or my bladder, or my nose; that I would take my oblivion henceforth in pinches like snuff; and that this intermittent dah-dit-dah-dit, cutting up my consciousness in cubes, was the first signal of senescence: C for ceasing, C for shutting shop. It wasn’t their leaving home, which I didn’t mind at all, that made my frame a codger. It was the pale stutter of their figures on the path, the grass, the driveway, that convinced me. I’d he Old Folks now.
   Who is not in league? The shadows of their skulls drifted across the opaque glass—Culp and Planmantee, perhaps—so it seemed so, and I drew back like a startled breath. 1 didn’t dare eavesdrop and risk hearing some opinion of me, yet I couldn’t swing that damn door in upon them, either, to gibe and josh as I had all week and would again—lifelong, it seemed—Planmantee's huge watch-chained shape against Culp’s thin or Governali’s woppy bulk or Her-schel’s wispy gray.
   Not your old pal Boyle, Kohlee baby, but Bernoulli, Planmantee says, saw the laws of history. Events are made of events, agree? but we gotta find the right ones, the right elements. If I fall asleep in church, and that puts a match to the ass of the preacher, why, then, my somnolence is a part of the service; but if I surreptitiously scratch my balls at a wedding (never mind the symbolism, Kohler, never mind all that), my private itch, sneaked scratch, aren’t atoms of anything. O yeah, my glo-
nous person is a part (I am expected to attend the ceremony; I give a present to the happy pair; I kiss the eager ugly bride), but otherwise my body—bones, fluids, cells, physiognomy—does not matter a fart's worth. Ain’t that a eri-men-nently? Now those teeny little events, like thrown rice, right? they collide, they rebound, they batter one another, passing the heat of their motion around like biscuits at a banquet; so then the total historical power of any event, see?—it’s simple! ah, such simplicity!—anyway, the historical strength of the ceremony depends on the number and violence of its random inner collisions, and the good grip of their container (the church, for instance, and its rites, right? holds the wedding in its bounds; what effect do these "I do"s have on those passing cars?); but chance is everything, isn't it, Kohler? and maybe as luck would have it there’s a leak, you know, in the little biosystem of my body—say 1 have the flu when 1 kiss her—so then the bride starts to cough in four days and the rest of the wedding trip is ruined—she's coughing all over the Falls, see? and so the wedding which was to make their fucking legit, which was ceremoniously, not causally, connected to their connections, correct? it sprang a leak, right? quite accidentally, and now the bride is in bed with a bug, and hot from a different fever; yeah, Kohlee, that’s how it goes.
   I pulled out the shrunken drawers of my schoolboy desk to find perfumes, powders, and compacts, bracelets and skin-bracers and soap, utensils for a life nobody’s led, because there’s not a cranny in this house my aunt hasn't stuffed with something, often wrapped in its original tissue, still tagged, new however old it grows, however stale or out of style. The kids go for everything like squirrels, and I must get pointlessly cross before 1 take them for a stroll down those empty shady sidewalks 1 once triked, streets which still don’t have sewers but are paralleled by weedy shallow ditches where I used to float boats after heavy rains and, with swagger and daring, leap.
   Light has drained out of the windows like a sink. A radio is on. Carl is crying in an upstairs room. Martha is trying to conquer the kitchen. I remember the old stove—21ucc/c(do<Jc, was it called?—a happy hen on its white enamel oven door, the blue flame like a dancing decoration when we warmed ourselves in front of it on cold mornings. Frost made the sun pink and the kitchen table shook beneath its spill when I slid under. My aunt will soon be home from work, one hip hurrying a hop ahead of the rest of her. Mother is on the sofa in a caterwaul of clippings, all about me and my youthful exploits, columns she holds up to her watering eyes a moment before she mews with recognition and returns them to the tangle. My father is dressed in a thick green woodman’s plaid wool shirt, so heavy with adjectives he can hardly lift his arms. I’m home, I say softly to myself. My father tips one large ear toward the speaker. The bottles on his table shudder slightly. Fie doesn't approve of the news. Heigh-ho. I’m home. I’m home. I’ve brought us all here to my home.
                  And in that atmosphere . . .
   I still see her feet, hanging out of the cloth of her gown like a pair of pulls. If I yank, what will ring? and down the dark hall my mother wobbled toward my father’s bed, and I realized then that they no longer slept in the same roonv—it should have been no surprise—and that normally she would be sleeping now where Martha and I lay together on the debris of my childhood, because the bell had gone off in my ear and I had risen as one called by the last trump to judgment—terrified—disoriented—Martha rolling toward me like a dislodged log. There were murmurs: my mother’s and my father’s voices, a broken moan from Martha, whimpers from the children sleeping in a corner full of pillow litter. The feet returned and slowly descended the stairs. She must be sleeping on the sofa—final bed of breadman's love, as I was expected to sleep on sheets of solitary vice, sheets I’ve filled since with notes on deportation procedures and other technicalities—to sleep above bedpans and chamber pots which my mother had collected and shoved out of sight behind the tasseled chenille spread, inadequately rinsed—to sleep . . . well, 1 did not. I stared into the darkness until I could see my mother’s ginny breath float by like night-sky clouds, waiting for the bell to ring again, my father’s body passing its requests along a wire, not like Marconi’s “What hath God . . .” but much less grandly: Bring a pot, I've got to pee, or Please, l want to take a pill, or O, I've gotten stiff and need to turn, turn over in my almost grave.
   The breadman was the last love of my mother’s life. She had begun by buying pies so thick with tapioca the filling stood without the need of a crust, and these she would stack atop the refrigerator until 1 threw them out. His rolls grew slowly old and hard as 1 thought his rocks. The truck he drove had animals on it. His firm was the first with cracked wheat. Later on, he brought her bottles—the bastard—and for Christmas I was required to hand him a carton of cigarettes wreathed for the season in Lucky Strike green. He was a sturdy square-faced little man who knew how to blush but not how to stop—he couldn’t or wouldn’t talk—and not until now have I considered how her drunken negligence of dress must have seduced him, or what a pair they must have made: her gown open like a drape, his pants in a puddle about his ankles, their liquid kisses, doggy embrace.
                               I once wet my bed just for fun by soaking my sheet in my cum.
                          It was tom off in strips, and my mother’s tight lips locked my deed in a heart that was numb.
                    And in that atmosphere, Herschel ventured the opinion that history was, after all, a process through which human consciousness perhaps endeavored to achieve self-contained existence. Bei-sich-selbst-seyn-scheiss, 1 thought, we are as free to be of value as chewed gum; but Governali clapped Herschel on the back, shouting bellissimo, or some such Italianate slop, adding with great emotion that consciousness, of course, was simply Time in its bellissimist manifestation; while Planmantee glared at them both, scornfully denying such containment altogether (not even for the fruit bat, he said), and pronouncing their heady self-awareness an historical superfluity—the randy dance of light in a cake of melting ice.
Nervous in another time, nervous on another day, nervous as I see my wife now is—steeply, precipitously nervous—I watched the wind bring me relatives and dust and clouds of bugs and hail thicker than the wedding rice would be, like sky falling through the soupy heat (though 1 wouldn’t stay—sour me—to throw my fistful); nervous because of those damn green greedy flying things, and sick of the dust between my teeth, beneath my cuffs and collar, and all my relatives around me with their incessant whirl of speech, a plague of small talk darkening the eye, the perpetual chewing like a run from the nose; nervous; wracked; annoyed somewhere beyond pique; there was sperm of one dry sort or other everywhere; 1 couldn’t stand it; unnerved, 1 pocketed my phallus and fled; ah, well, I was courting Martha, then, but her beautiful breasts refused to cover me (in the beginning as in the end); her blond hair stayed fiercely pinned (at start through finish); and among the multitude of her connections and her friends, I felt like Mad Meg in the Maelstrom; nervous; bent; randy and dissatisfied; vexed; so much so I removed my person from my cousin’s wedding celebration (for which I’d bought a new blue suit), and amid hostile uncomprehending faces, angry arguments and explanations, coupled myself to one of those trains like a car crammed with refugees, and had myself drawn away toward history and other desperations.
   Ponderous aunts and uncles, uncles lean as withered beans, aunts pale as piecrust, grandmapas with rheum and gout, cousins shrill as sirens, sounding themselves through the house like warnings of death from the air (later, in London, I heard them often), cousins who scratched you under the table, all agloat cousins who told on other cousins, cousins who scooped up fistfuls of mashed potato and let it slime over their wrists; aunts who wore hats in the house, aunts who starched and ironed linens, aunts who stirred pots, flagel-
lated rugs, opened doors for dogs, swatted flies, and reminisced fondly of death and diseases as if they were high school dances, former flames; uncles and great-uncles who, like the hoppers, spat long brown jets of chewing tobacco across the railings while they rocked; nieces and nephews, a few of those too, who peed in their pants, threw up, bawled, and beat you on the shins and ankles with alphabet blocks; relatives at every conceivable remove, but not removed, each noisily present; then friends of both the bride and groom who came to cry and nudge and slap and snicker, and all of the groom’s loose connections—countless—no easier to bear, no simpler to ignore: Swedes, Danes, Germans, Germans mainly, mostly Lutheran, though a few were Catholic from the German south (even poorer, much despised); and uncles who argued and uncles who only grunted, and one who restrained the flow from his nose with sniffs like tearing paper; aunts who mended clothes like surgeons; nephews who instantly reinjured them; aunts with moist wads balled in moister hands who toiled up and down the daylong stairs on legs like fat raw sausages; many mothers, of course, and fathers, my own among them, not then crippled, not then drunken, mother hurt and father angry—always—and the aunts with hats who sighed with such expression you’d have thought they were blowing kazoos, and those who took second helpings with a coy apologetic lurch, holding down the struggling meat with the flats of their knives; and the men who drank in the barn like small boys sneaking a smoke and told jokes about farmwives and stallions, farmboys and sheep, or bragged of the shitting prowess of their huge, brown, singularly boweled cows; the cousin who tried to climb drainpipes, the one who wanted me to kiss her warts but who wouldn’t tell me where the warts were, cousins who took out the slops and who smelled as much of complaint as of swill; uncles who philosophized or otherwise explained things, creating, in the house, the noise of straining tractors, uncles who were proud they could piss like a horse, and who ingested certain liquids to permit them to continue to; gramps who burned their pockets with pipes and their absent minds with yearning; grams who were already laid out in their knitting baskets, needles crossed, who couldn’t hear a word they were so far away, vacationing in death; aunts in aprons, uncles in knuckles and sun-wrinkles, wash-faded shirts, slack suspenders, bruised arms and metal-hooking high shoes with dirt-clogged laces, who lost their spectacles on their noses, as the aunts did, or on mantels, on tables, or failed to observe them caught like enormous dragonflies in the jaws of books, the lips of sofas—as here and there, scarcely noticed, in water glasses, softly leaning, sunken teeth set in sick pink gums; and there were many violet-brown photographs of babies held in heavy albums as though by Negro mammies, girls in high-necked blouses, men with shiny hair and youthful mustaches (no limper, certainly, than Rilke’s), and the one which I partic-
ularly remember of my father, in smile, tie, button-sweater, cloth cap, pride, and knickers, standing on a dirt road and displaying by its tail, as you might a prize fish, a six-foot snake; there were reproductions, too, of moonlit canoes and falling water, squeezed in frames of unpeeled birch the tame Indians sold to the savage tourists, mottoes burned into slices of that same romantic wood, a finger-pointing figure of Jesus, heavy cut-glass bowls which were always empty, bud vases which were tippy, pin cushions which were busy, stiff, and dangerous, a gramophone with horn and dog, some copies of The Delineator, sheet music, a many-volumed, richly pictured history of the Great War: the taxicabs at the Marne, Italians levering their own cannons off an Alpine cliff, impressive piles of something dead in pools of trenchy water, Spads and Fokkers in gentlemanly jousts, and the fearsome Boche parading in long lines, spikes on their hats, not a gentleman under them; hats which were, I’d thought (once upon that time), for butting: in close quarters, hand to hand, you lowered your head and wham! right in the belly! then a novel called The Man Thou Gavest, Dana, Alcott, Henty, dresser scarves the purpling red of a blown rose, lamps with glass shades like chambermaids’ caps, pots of sick ivy, one hand-painted ashtray—from Baden—the shape of a softened triangle, like Susu’s ferocious head, a heavy oval mirror looped with gilt cord, goblets of cobbled glass, threadbaring rugs, something thick by Teddy Roosevelt, two battered silver trays, shadowy with tarnish, malacca cane on which something vaguely menacing was written—in Hong Kongese—three cheap tiny china slippers the color of cream, souvenir fans, and perched on rails near the ceiling like mothy stuffed exotic birds, decorative plates in every shape but round, often with their edges gnawed just like the uncles were whom whole families had eaten from for years and bitten too—in haste, in need; all of them images and photos now—aunts, uncles, objects, the faded tracings of earlier ages—as were the many trinkets which had been carried from the old country, views of the Rhine seen through the stereopticon, paperweights with blizzards which could be shaken up inside them, dolls which had grown old remaining the same age—washed, not moved, by time—wooden acrobats whose tights had flaked away leaving them nude but innocuous, since their genitals, having a greater affection for the cloth they were kept in than the crotches they hung from, were absent too; and I can imagine these patient aunts and their unfeeling needles mending the vaginal slits in bloomers, ironing out the dents put in blouses by the breasts which still fit in them, scrubbing the skin in shirts and dresses, for if I had a choice, and were their parts, I’d leave like the acrobats, preferring the fate of worn-out clothing to the fate of worn-out men. The land swallowed them, toil took them, wood-burning stoves and childbearing, pots, pans, curtains, livestock, gardens, all the sorry work upon the land, all that worry for the
earth and its objects, the careful crops, the tireless and terrible tending they were broken to, as though the world around them were someone sick in a sickroom, breathing their last; so that even the preparations for the wedding, even the pies that were baked, the huge stews, soups, and kettles of beans, the barrels of sauerkraut, the strings of stool-like sausage, the hot hours of canning, deprived them of what they intended to sustain and were with these labors celebrating. Had a little of this time and this devotion been given to thought or to feeling, to the cultivation of some sense of themselves which went beyond the drayhorse, if some small effort had gone into renewing sensation, into a passion for beauty, the elevation of desire . . . into love (someone save the word, it does not factor, and I’m unable), then, perhaps, just possibly . . . but the load was too heavy, the sky too great an enemy, and they lived the lives they lived like hoe handles, as washerwomen, cooks, wombs, silos—as physical locations—and now they were grandpas and grandmas, aunts and uncles, tired and tiresome, victims of the bodies they had used like ploughs upon themselves, for they were prairies too, desiccated, windswept places, and the dust from their own dryness had come for them at last, had risen from their own abused bodies as that greater dust had risen from a dry abused land, and now, staining them as deeply as crazed plates, it settled back in answer to a cry from their birth for an end; and it was appropriate, only right, as a sign from God or from the selves they might have been, that occasionally the substance which made the symbol should multiply itself, seek something in hyperbole which otherwise could not be reached, and so (like an ash of mourning large as night) become monstrously manifest—in a whirling wind, a plague of locusts, or a storm of dust—until it finally caused the deaths it all along had been an emblem and a warning of.
   We’ve not lived the right life. 1 agreed. I’m decades older. Dust is not the plague which plagues me any longer, even if heaven’s still remorseless. And although there is no more unmedical a man, I watch the clouds for signals of the sky’s demise. Why, in fact, last August we had the worst hail Indiana’s had in thirty years, according to the papers, and [ read how a baby was killed in its carriage, pummeled first, then tucked in under ice . . . (but where was mother?). Mine was gin-down on the sofa at one time or other, entertaining the bread-man—on slime-green mohair—when 1 arrived as sibilant as a puncture; though late in the day the light through our front yard fir trees put our picture window deep at sea, allowing me to stare as if protected by the glass at strange new spaces, ocean ferns and fish who sang among the needles. Peggy's flaps flew open as she started up, her gray hair came retangled. Must 1 perpetuate all that? Lou? What did it do to any of us for me to love you? The face 1 held so often mid my knees, the gaze it gave which made me for a change a stranger
to my past—is past, and I am thoroughly familiar. An aspirin bottle kept her, the gin so clear the hand which trembled it seemed empty. For we’ve snow. Crisp slices have been served the starlings. Because I must remember, they hatefully refuse to pass ... all these hangovers from history. Soiled and silver-sofa’d hair, puddled eyes, my bloated mother, dear, your housecoat’s come unbuttoned, here, 1 shall redo it. I’ll unlimb father. Reconceive. Pick another cunt to come from. I shall lie myself as far as love will take me. Set fresh plates out. Make my new cock metal like a trumpet. And who shall scatter cracked corn for the birds? Since it is Sunday. Or hold my swelling penis calmly as my sweating hand? Or consecrate sensation? Or turn my tongue into a lollipop? Play tennis with a sparrow? Train savage dogs to sled a blinded cane? Or after love is over, linger? No one now. Heaven's for the hangman or the Hun. My god, to be a man as I am—smothered with women and children like a duck with onions. I'm so afraid. I’ll calm my fingers down a glove. White ice plummets in my glass. Years of dry days flush up from my feet. The clink has startled them. I startled mother. History startled me. Melting one small Jew to keep the ovens cool. And then another . . . Schopenhauer, you old fool, this world was never my Idea. And Culp makes a noise like a roller skate beside me. In crowds, the Persians say, death is a festival. In what warm square has my love made her mouth a fountain? Spruce limbs soft and separate as waves which have been stolen from the ocean wash across my glass, and the pale sky windows in the distance for me, even through September, though Lou had dark and holy eyes each time I loved her. 1 should never sneer at desolation. Such lips would take a life to understand. Ich bin ein regenloses Land. Can I forgive the plague I am? The window where 1 work is dark as charcoal. Kohler’s hole. The house is silent. You’d powdered your naked forehead, and upon your shoulders, mother, you wore a breadman’s bruise. Thus my sensations have been sieved. Window through window: I want to pass. For I have uncled youngsters too, by now. Yes. By now, I wonder. Perhaps there is no right life to be lived.
TODAY I BEGAN I am enormously excited. Enormously.
          TO DIG                      Today I began to dig; took my first bite
                                      of the earth; put in my first pick. Astonishing. That I have actually begun. Hard to believe. A beginning. With that first blow—what elation I felt! Feel. I am light. I float although there is no wind. I swoop low to gather altitude the way the roller coaster does, and there I see the thick world differently. Engineless and silent, I float under
everything as easily as an image in the water. At last—at long last—I’ve felt fistfuls in my fists. Like Uncle Balt, I’ve got a good grip. 1 shall split the earth asunder. InLMfli! I write Y1S8—with a heavy bulbous exclamation point borrowed from the comics. 1P@W8 The very absurdity of my swing, its narrow place and expansive purpose, made the blow I struck like a culminating thrust. I've acquired a short-handled pick like my build. Well, it’s dirty
squatty work. But what a perfect location for the trip: better than under a bed or beneath a stove; better than a shower or a john; better even than an attic, although going up to get down has much to recommend it. Of course I’ve been clearing away dirt and rust and ash, coal, clinkers and undefinable dusts, for quite a while—weeks—carrying out all kinds of wet gunk in two-pound coffee cans, and loads of crusty stuff like shale I’ve scraped from the bottom of the firebox (that damn cat has been shitting there, coming through a pipe, 1 suppose, who knows? and finding cinders suitable). It is a barfy business. (LOOInlS But today I began to dig. Yes. © Y1E1I8 By becoming a worm, this worm turns.
  Nervous
  Nervous     I tiptoe down the stairs. It is another day. My guard is still
  Nervous     asleep. The basement has a welcome moist smell like deep
woods after rain. I imagine mushrooms, soft black leaves. I have learned the place like a lover. I know it better than I know myself. There is one large room where the washtubs squat. Clotheslines made of wire run across the ceiling among the water pipes. What could dry here, so far from warmth and light, out of all moving air? Adjacent, there is an old coal cellar where we store tin cans and jars, a few tools, a broken wagon and a rusting sled. A rug, which I don’t remember standing on end in its roll like a sentry, leans against the wall like a sentry. Waterlogged now, it sags slowly into itself, and smells gravely of wet wool and mold. The gray basement windows are like sightless eyes. The fourth room contains the body of the furnace with all its wrapped white pipes. It became a Gulliver too great to move when we converted to oil, and the new furnace sits there, too, in a corner, boxy and efficient, painted an electric blue. A leaky water heater which never got hauled away stands by its replacement like a metal memento mori. I measure my height against the still bright cylinder. Dials come up to my nose. “Time cannot do to ordinary things what we timelessly do to one another," I announce, although in a careful whisper, repeating the first sentence of my masterpiece; and the sound is soaked up as if I spoke to a world of sand. The first thing I shall need is an excuse. I’ve known that all along. But I can’t think of any. We’re not in the body-burying business. I can’t pretend to be canning pears or running the old wringer or turning out chair legs on a lathe. She is nervous, nervous. Suspects X, fears Y. No one in his right
mind would spend more than a minute down here. However, 1 am not in my right mind, am I? 1 am in my left mind, now, leaving like Columbus for a new world’s freedom, and for fame. Dear cellar: my concealed cell, where I shall be a mole if not a monk. Everywhere the bulbs are bare, of course, and hang from the cord which sends them light. The rough walls are poorly wedged and weakly mortared. Insects gather in the cracks like dirt and damp: the most obnoxious kinds of bug, I'm happy to say, because they are my protectors, my allies in these new dig-down days: millipedes and pale gray rolypolys, oozy slugs, roaches quick as a cricket’s click, and spiders with soft sticky webs and angry black backs, playing at the poisonous, pretending to be pouncy. 1 give praise, I render thanks to them.
   There are nine stagnant rows of rocks, and each rock is roughly nine inches high and about a foot long. The mortar in some places n'existe pas and seems meant to be more of a plug than adhesive. The floor is cement washed smooth over cobbles, I think; and with my pick that’s what I’ve now proved. In any case, it undulates like land. 1 am not much more than five and a half feet beneath public footfall when 1 squeeze myself behind the old octopipe. That’s not far. It’s scarcely a beginning! There will certainly be drains, some septic plumbing. Have to be careful of that—the gas lines. And 1 shall want to run under the whole room, not simply pop under one outer wall like a con. Suppose I were suddenly to encounter my wife in this place, or, like a rat, she, me? What in the world are you doing back there, Kohlee, she inquires. What do I intone in my turn? Well, Marty, you see here an historian hunting for a false cause, for a reason why I’m here which will not be the reason why I’m here. Come off it. What’s going on? I’m thinking about digging a tunnel—you know—to escape from the camp. Can the crap, she says in her most hardened manner. Ah, you see, I say, I’ve told you the truth, but what does the truth receive? abuse, cuffs, disbelief. I’ve told you the truth as I always do when I know you really want me to hand you a lie on a paper plate like something the cat’s shat. Well, Kohlee, you're a queer one. You’ve been tiptoeing around the house for weeks like some cartoon creature pursued by the furniture, and now I’ve caught you skulking in back of this heap of rust. I am down here, my dear, looking for a reason to be down here. She really hates it. Come on, Koh, don’t play the wimp, come straight. Her ghost is imposing, floating upstage like a prima donna, though she’s not into her mad scene yet—she’s playing mine. But how do you speak to a ghost if you’re not an Elizabethan? Ah, I’m a scholar, and thus well fit for it. Most ghosts come out of a corpse like a breath full of words, but Marty’s pale face betrays no vagrant spirituality. It is blank of being: that’s what makes her a ghost. Anyway, what an absurd question: what am I doing? List, fair queen. But list is what the ghost says. But say you’re a nation, Marty, a little country,
and I march in to steal your wealth and take your land and rape your women; shall I confess before my crime’s commission and pass across the world’s fair face like an evil shadow? shall 1? or shall I argue that I’ve come to recover my countrymen, marooned in your cities like shipwrecked sailors on Circe’s isle? eh? shall I say that? and when I rescue my minorities by extending their fatherland over them like a sheet (a pertinent ambiguity in our present circumstances, poignant even), the justification I need for my deed, like a brass plaque at a murder site, is sweetly complete (the couplet means the scene is over, Marty, exeunt all but the octopipe, being real), so you see, Marty, I’ll say, I’m simply down here examining the size of the old furnace because 1 am considering having it hauled away. Eh? How’s that? I shall spread my arms as though to lie about a fish. Can’t you see a Ping-Pong table here, and the pitter-patter of little balls about? and a dartboard there, in the shape of a heart (do you hear the rhyme, old soul? like the menacing beat of my army’s boots: thap' thap'thap'. . .). Are you beating your meat back there? is that why I’m getting a speech instead of an answer? That is the sound of darts embedding themselves in the cork. You always were hand in love with yourself, Willie, 1 will say that, Martha says. That . . . that . . . that . . . Yes, I am beating out, Marty, as dust from a rug; I am going off—off into a world of words like Columbus, to discover an old land he’ll call new. But Martha does not jiggle a tit at my jokes, my nervous gibes, and stares at me as if 1 were imaginary. Columbus may have been a mockie, Marty, think of that, and he burnt blacks in the Indies as an example to others who might have taken it into their woolly heads to be as lazy as their nature naturally inclined them. Wilfred? What are you writing in there? What are all those pieces of paper you’ve been secreting about between books and such? What is happening? In where? in here? In there! Won’t you ever finish? Won t you ever give over scribbling and come out? I’ve locked myself in my pen for safekeeping. Koh— I am writing myself into a whirlworld, Martha. The circulation of sound shall draw me up up up up up. 1 am overcoming certain Protestant pressures from my Past by whaling away on my weenie. O Koh—. Cut it out.
   Flo on sweet Flo till I tell my tune. O Flo, you sugared girl and cookie-hearted whore, our name for Time, thanks to Governali, Time with a capital like Columbus, back in Ohio, remember those eerie nights of? where we used to go to visit once every morose moon, to visit my aboveground parents, buried in the air like certain savages (your description, mkm, as your luggage still says, from b.c. our marriage, and one you wouldn’t have employed if you had seen a few plein-air ceremonies, the dead propped up in heaps, thrown down in ditches—corpses by the cornfield, tumbril, truckload, hay wain, rucksack, wheelbarrow, busload, train—clothed, half clothed, disheveled, slit, stripped,
naked, limbed and unlimbed, washed and laid out, dirty and dumped and gut-ripped and raw and rotting, half melted, part burned, starved, a fuzzy cunt once, so innocent and lovely, what a loss!), their love spoiling like cut fruit, dear parents, soon there’d be the bee's buzz as they come to the juice, and the flowers would bend with them, the petals of the roses like blood on the brown ground, back in Ohio, in Flo, early in our marriage, but not before your cunt had closed like a bankrupt company and caused my depression. Cut it out. The basement best resembles a dungeon, that’s why I’m here. 1 am a character in a Dumas novel, falsely accused. That’s why I’m here. Because 1 waste away while adding on, pace all the spaces of my days with a mental measure—so far, so square, so long—and do / //s to keep a calendar, etch initials, mottoes in the walls, recite my heart to keep my head. O god, deliver me from the body of these bones! Remember in Ohio sleeping in my childhood bed and stroking my penis to remind me of my youth when 1 lay alone holding its heat as if that warmth were the only sign of life?
  Tell me what you’re doing down here, she says, besides getting soot on your fly. And have the dignity, the decency, to tell it straight—the way it is, not what it’s like. Meanwhile, while you’re getting your guts up for it, let me tell you something, Willie: you aren’t funny. Sure, you crack wise, but there’s no fun inside, no crunchy kernel. Your wit is all shell, she says, hard over hollow, like a walnut pretending to be a beetle, she says, with her customary nerve-grating explicitness, carrying every figure to its last place. I am growing culpable, I answer—mea—mea—capable of Culp; and Martha’s lips draw themselves up in a Grosz. I shove my stomach past a pipe, listening to the cellar dampen just the way I heard, tiptoeing carefully down the stairs, the house haunt itself. Then I am startled by gunfire like a rattle of pans in the sink. This won’t be easy. Far too risky with Martha in the house. Yessirree, that tread above me does not belong to the funny fat lady who lives in the apartment on the next floor. No. She can descend through the ceiling like a god. 1 complete my circuit of the furnace. 1 am lecturing on history, educating the asbestos. So it’s like adding a man to the firing squad in order to argue that the extra gun fired the fatal shot. 1 check my fly for soot. I’m too big for this business. It’ll be hard to get my belly through that opening. A past event is like a slain man tied to a post, my dear, with all those deadly bullets in him, and historians standing around like county coroners claiming that the bullet through the belt or the button did it. Yesterday I said the same thing to my class. They snored without making a sound. In the snow-cold muumuu of a ghost, Martha’s face fades as her torso solidifies, her Aryan blood surfacing like lard. I work on her features, but I’ve forgotten what they are, the way I sometimes forget how to spell the commonest words when I’m writing them on the board. Without a mouth she’ll still talk back,
from her crack like as not. A cause? a reason? There are so many. It’s a good place to spend the summer. I’ll have to take out the dirt in little dribs and drabs or she’ll get wise and where shall 1 dispose of it? An abandoned well. That would be nice. If Uncle Balt were about I could fill him up. Okay. Do you know why Culp and 1 and all the guys make our smart remarks? We are embarrassed by experience. We are one warm blush. We don’t know which way to look as when I blundered upon the breadman humped upon my mother lumped upon the sofa. Life suddenly becomes a dirty joke. A cause? a reason? What is not a cause? A fly in my ointment. There have been several occasions during the last few years (I’ve incised them in these seeping cellar walls the way a prisoner marks his bath days: b //), when your genitals were genial; when you looked at me with something like contentment; when you simply enjoyed a joke, put a sugared finger to my mouth-—moments might be a better word—when some of my old feelings for you reappeared like that boyhood friend one hardly recognizes and can no
                                                         nervous
longer cherish. Could I express them now? now that you tug nervously at the
                                                         nervous
skin of your left hand as though pulling a glove; now that you buy your smiles on sale at the cosmetics counter; now that you rebound from every bump like a balloon. Yup. Once you were a heaped and steaming plate. Well, I’ve eaten of you; licked you so you squirmed. I’ve choked you down; got fatter from your fat. But this hunger I have is misplaced in front of an emptied dish. A cause? 1 need my exercise. A reason? Everyone ought to have a hobby: a vagina to China. Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men, the radio would wonder. It is that third room—that heart of the house—the distant chamber in those gothic horror stories where a dead spouse lies undisturbed in a shroud of cobwebs and dust. . . Meet my marriage—looking as if she were alive, I vow . . . yes, it is the secret ventricle where the dead blood goes . . . that space under the sunporch where I keep my trunk of German memorabilia—nothing much: a flag, insignia, armbands, a pair of boots, a few hats, photos, letters from Magus Tabor, etc., one warning proclamation, and so on, a flask for schnapps—a collection which Martha has forbidden to rise above the level of the cellar, although no stake’s been driven through these souvenirs to guarantee their death, so there’s really nothing to prevent a little silver braid from winking in the dim light, or those black boots, naturally blacker in the black of night, from prowling the house, or some of that anti-Semitic porno stuff reading aloud to itself in a slow soft guttural voice until the swagger stick nearby gets stiff.
                  Of course I felt like a fool—forcing my way into an abandoned furnace as though it were a safe. I had no faith in what I was doing. There was no gold, no
goal. I couldn't confront the absurdity of it. 1 went from whim to whim like a bee. I told myself I was going to dismantle the thing and carry it, bit by bit, out of the house. I told myself that 1 would remove the water heater, too, one way or another. But I was simply a fat melancholy man with a crowbar—a Paul Pry.
                                     Our world is old, Martha, don’t you see?
                       and all our dreams are ironies; our pieties have been exposed— what principle is not a prejudice?— and our philosophies rot in the back lots of our culture like struck sets.
   O my, such a speech, she says. You must have studied the Latins. You must have pebbled a lot of Demosthenes. Not least, Cicero. Demosthenes, Cicero: such recondite references, and you only a girl with a Grosz mouth. Yes, I am that age that Cicero had reached when, in a bit of peace between one Rome and another, he wrote of the orator’s art. “As I frequently contemplate and call to mind the times of old,” doesn’t his great work begin? Pish? Pish, you say, Marty, pish? I’m your wife and lower half and I can pish on you all I want. You are my memory’s ghost, Martha, a sheet of insubstantiality, without fat or fiber. So there were days of old even for Cicero. And what permits happiness to an honest and honorable man, our orator is asking. That’s the direction of this great oral gesture—the gist—the pith and pish of it. And his answer is: peaceful employment and dignified retirement. But the times had made a balls of everything, and so, now on the dark side of his life, this man who spoke his penship to the page begins his book as I, in my damp days as well, commence my labors. O I know my Cicero, my dear; didn’t I have to get a handle on the harangue, with old Tabor as my master, and Der Fiihrer as my subject? I had to lay my eyes on all the ancients, but particularly on this man—spokesman for me now—man of the hour at least for a day, because in nearly a thousand letters, not to mention his essays and orations, he told the truth about himself and his time. The stupid bastard. He was a damned indiscretion industry. Well, that charming frankness has blackened his name. The toga fell from his torso, and there he stood, exposed and solid and unembarrassed as a statue: a man who paid for his bad judgment with his life, who was never as good as his word, but a man worthy of the shit of pigeons. He longed for peaceful employment and a dignified retirement, but he knew he would have to take sides, join the ROTC or the Falangists, be a breaking rock or broken window. If 1 am to emulate his honesty, then I shall have to tell the most revealing of my lies. I must dig a hole through this house. Well, I’ve begun. I feel some soreness already because my hands have not yet
hardened to it. The pen, and not the pick, is their peaceful and customary employment. I shall descend and bend, creating a whole, as Culp would certainly say, twelve philippics deep. And Cicero—diswholed—had his hand nailed to the rostrum he had so often ennobled with his eloquence, nailed there alongside his unkempt head, which silenced him not at all, of course, because his tongue was still loose, his voice howls even now for vengeance, although now its noise must be redirected away from Catiline, a ghost which only Cicero’s own orations let live, and sent against that mass murderer, Mankind, whom he once mistakenly extolled, a murderer who walks among us with all of Catiline’s arrogance and effrontery, full of plans for our death. Who will kill the killers when their killing is completed? The Germans did away with millions ineffectually, because millions of guilty ones remained, pretending to decorate and dignify their cities like so many public fountains while really fulsomely pissing on one another and offering to their mutual concerns the comfort of breasts and heads of stone. In the name of heaven, you scurrilous buffoons, how long must our patience be abused! how long will man’s savagery deface our so-called human look and make a mockery of us? to what limit, to what an ending, will you go? Who of us is any longer in doubt of our depravity; do we need another demonstration? for we know what we did yesterday in Europe, what we do today in Africa and Asia, what plans we have to destroy Tomorrow itself, as though Time were a fellow creature. O ye Wraiths, ye Absent Gods and dead Immortals, look upon us here! What an age! what moralities! Empty skies, plaster eagles, TV faces and their blatant lies are now our leaders. Look on us, then, and laugh your fill. . . at least while we remain to be amusing.
  My big book, like this big house, hangs over me as though it were the limits of the universe—the fl —a world of guilt and Germans, innocence and Jews, and like Cicero’s, of murderers murdered. This house must have a cellar, a wrathkeller, Culp would certainly say: there must be an underworld under this world, a concealment of history beneath my exposition of it, a gesture which will symbolize my desperation. O my father! country! house of Kohler! hole up here! cling to the furnacy end of this hollow rope, relinquish the air for the earth. A plaque on the front door may one day read: Herein lies a pointless passage put down by a Pretender to the Throne of Darkness. Let God uproot this pathway if He likes, we shall still stare at the hole the hole has left, and wonder at the works of Man, and marvel at the little bit that mostly Is, and at the awkward lot that mostly Aint. Martha hates it when I shape my sentences. She says it doesn’t sound sincere.
  Wouldn't it be nicer not to know the past? not to remember the madness of your mother, anger of dear old dad, the days of dressings-down, to forget how much has been forgotten and the consequent neglect of friends and children, to feel that making love could still be luminous? Knowledge of Good and Evil,
Martha: that’s what we were forbidden, and not without reason. But now— now we know all the ins, and that has put us on the outs.
   Martha hates it when I shape my sentences. She says it falsifies feeling.
   It is a killer—knowledge is—the big K. It’s the reason why you’re hovering around down here in your light white nightie, Martha: you want to know what I’m doing down here; why I’ve been tiptoeing through the house and fearful of the furniture lately; you want a bit of info concerning my peculiar behavior; well, if you knew, what would you do? You would unmold like a lamb made of butter. History with the Great H, Governali’s Idol, has destroyed tragedy, the epic as well (Sabining the Muses), and only incidentally done in love, marriage, kingship, religion, the Wild West, because heroes are creatures created by ignorance; like infatuations, they are born of hype, of superstition, fraud, as are gods, saints, and movie stars; and they all pass into legend, myth, romance, still further fictions, like clouds into clouds. Old Cicero, it seems, can only be admired so long as we haven’t read his letters and thus learned of his fears and hesitations, his envies and ambitions, as long as we remain ignorant of his all-too-human nature. Do you want to wonder at Albert Schweitzer, Mahatma Gandhi, Churchill, Charles de Gaulle? believe in Washington and play at Lincoln logs? Goody. First put out your eyes: blind, you will dream them clearly. Why do you go on so, Martha says, you have more superstitions than a monk. It’s true. I do. Marty—you’re right. I believe what Culp believes: in dry tinder and a hot cock. 0 for christ’s sake, cut it out. You never tire of talking, do you? whether there’s anyone about or not, because otherwise you’re not alive; how would you know you still had a soul if it weren’t always leaking logoi. That’s why I’m down here, Marty, with my pick and shovel, putting a hole through the middle of fur ace. Look at that gap, God, like an upside-down smoke hole in an oven. No one will find it hidden between fur and ace. Who would suspect that pair? or even pair them in the first place? So, at least, that’s safe. I shall need to lose weight. Look nice for my new lover and her eight arms. Trajan’s Column is a solid tunnel turning through the sky, while my pillar will be made of air and go the other way; it will celebrate defeat, not victory; for if our heroes have clay feet clear to their cocks, our villains can be believed. There’s no hell or hellfire, maybe, but there are fiends with forks. We can trust our traitors, our Judases, our Quislings; we can count on any Khan; Attila will never disappoint us; Stalin will remain stainless in his steel. We are all charter members of the 4-H Club: Hitler, Hess, Heydrich, Himmler. Heil nonny nonny and a Ho Ho Ho! We are even a bit put out with Mussolini because he was too comical a character, a cartoon Caesar, and, like that image on the tarot card, an upside-down clown. O, I know it is the ghost’s word—your word—Martha, but as I tell my students, list—list. Sure—sure it’s too simple to say that in our hearts only Evil is real, but, in fact, the Good—well—there is no bigg, there are just dinky ones, and even
they are fragile, intermittent, short-lived little pleasures, pulling-on-your-prick things, ambiguous, often costly in the long run, sometimes painful, embarrassing even, while wickedness prospers with a weed’s ease; rats are doing fine, flies ditto, pigeons, starlings, sparrows, they know how to eat off the streets and soil cement. Damn. It does drag one down: the dinginess down here. I’ll need light. How can 1 keep the cords concealed? Air will be at a premium. What else? Why must one bring the world into the tunnel, when the tunnel is supposed to be the way out? Lay the length of a lasting love alongside any hate, that of the Armenians, for instance, the Turks for the Greeks, the Serbs for everybody. Do you suppose if the Armenians had been done a good turn back then, instead of being thinned, they would remember? three square meals and clean clothes in corded bales and darned blankets and bandages and modern medicines for their festers and their flu? would such deeds be held tenderly against generations of grateful hearts? No one would think so. No one. No.
   So now my book is done: Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany needs only its impossible introduction to go forth. And what is all my labor worth? What does my work do but simply remove some of the armor, the glamour, of Evil. It small-e's it. It shakes a little sugar on the shit. It dares to see a bit of the okay in our great bugaboche. Inexcusable. Slander our saints, if you will, but please leave our Satan undefiled by any virtue, his successes inexplicable by any standard.
   Great undulating banners red as blood. And the brass bands. And the manly thud of uniformly set-down boots. And the rage inside the happy shouts. A hundred thousand spleens have found a mouth. Curtains of sperm are flung up the side of the sky. Hell has fertilized heaven. And now the hero comes—the trumpet of his people. And his voice is enlarged like a movie's lion. He roars, he screams so well for everyone, his tantrums tame a people. He is the Son of God, if God is Resentment. And God is Resentment—a pharaoh for the disappointed people.
   If you want to think about something really funny, kiddo, consider the fact that our favorite modern bad guys became villains by serving as heroes first— to millions. It is now a necessary apprenticeship.
   Martha hates being called "kiddo.” She thinks it the first letter of condescension.
   But if you want to think about something really funny, consider how the titles of tyrants change. We shall suffer no more Emperors, Kings, Czars, Shahs, or Caesars, to lop off our limbs and bum our homes, kiddo, defile our women and bugger our boys; the masses make such appointments now; the masses love tyranny; they demand it, they dance to it; they feel that their hand is forming the First Citizen’s Fist; so we shall murder more modestly in future: beneath the banners of II Duce, Der Fiihrer, the General Secretary or the Party Chairman, the CEO of something. I suspect that the first dictator of this country will be called Coach.
  Outside the sky is a hard blue as though glazed. It won't let a cloud cross, a bird in. Leaves are landing with the sound of sand. The sun has scissored its shadows out of the earth and walls and sold the silhouettes: side-nose view of someone with a flowing tie, steel beam, trouser pocket, twot made of twigs. The air would snap like a soda cracker if there were some soup on the spoon in my mouth. It is a day of definition, of clean and crisp distinctions like the dance of a fine mind. It is a day to move through without guilt or desire. And I have been down in the dirt commencing my dig. Thoughts have their shadows too, contours one could cut around, places they deprive of light. The sophisticated symbol of the tunnel, for instance, completes itself in the darkness of act; it is buried in the literal, in das ylumye Denken, in the vulgarities of practice. 1 had first hammered a hole through the cement only to strike rock, but I pried a heavy stone loose with my pick and soon held a big white boulder between my hands like a bowling ball. I’ve been wondering whether 1 should keep it as a souvenir. Scrubbed and bleached, it could hold back a door or sit like a skull on my desk. The shopkeeper frames his first sale; nails a banknote to the wall; to a chain, fastens the first dime he ever made in a ringlet of stainless steel. Perhaps I should keep a photographic record, too—befores and afters—the initial knock, the open door, the deeper stages of the dig, her panties on the floor, the piles of earth taken out, the confident sly look on my face, the head of my cock peeking from between her squoozen boobs like a pig in a blanket, the mummy’s curse, the sly smug look on my face, pieces of pot laid out to suggest the vessel. Signed snaps of stars and local notables, athletes and gangsters—each, it seems, squeezed in the same booth so the smiles would surface—they row the restaurant's walls. Like my signed official photograph of Goering in full regalia that’s chested down in #3— dark chamber of the heart—with Susu’s severed head and the folded quickclick of a daughter going down on her dad—that’s the story line—though even there, in the old shoe box and soldier’s trunk, my silent symbols lie.
  It is a day to be without aches and pains, without duties, without any bondage to belief. Uncoupled and Unculped.
  It is another day.
                                                                       OCT.
                   Culp
   Culp is a calamity. He is a punishment for my sins, a plague of boils, a subcutaneous itch, a neural jangle. After everyone else has walked out of my mind, he lingers like a bad smell.
   Culp claims to be a historian. He claims a special knowledge of the American Indian. He heads up a troop of scouts. They make moccasins and wear them on hikes. They make arrowheads out of flints, bows from the bushes, tomahawks out of stones tied to sticks. Culp is a kind of encyclopedia of survival. He shows his kids how to create headdresses from the feathers of table turkeys and city pigeons; he teaches them how to pound stale beef, rancid suet, and raisins only rabbits drop, into moist splats with a wooden mallet, and shape the mix into sullen, intractable cakes. He tells them it will stick to their ribs. He tells them it will help them live a long time underground. Pemmican: it’s good against the bomb
   Culp's kids paint their faces with berry juice and dance as though demented in ungainly figure-eights. They like to take overnights; sleep on the ground; cook in tin cans like tramps; sing around a dying fire. Culp also knows about corn silk and canoes (how to roll, how to smoke, how not to tip, how to right, if, anyway), and he has memorized some Indian chat, or so he claims, which charms the children, perhaps because his flat cheeks puff; but I think it’s because they adore adults who play the fool and make themselves look ridiculous. Of course, to Culp, it matters: deer spoor, land lie, moss growth, cloud code. Culp believes. He carries his beliefs about like a charm to ward off disease. He doesn’t exactly believe that beliefs are male or made of money like the Mormons, but it is easy to imagine him going from door to door, the Wigwam magazine in hand, pleading to be let in so he can harangue some poor soul about the glorious history and present plight of the red man. Because he is convinced of the superiority of Indian culture and the nobility of its savages, he feels he must also believe that Indian blankets are better and more beautiful than Persian rugs; that Indian horses never stumble, tire, grow old, or leave tracks; that Indian arrows fly true; that their medicine men know both men and medicine in a deep mystical sense, and perform miracles as easily as we remove warts and cut corns; that their squaws sew and serve; their elders advise wisely, passing the pipe of peace from hand to hand and measuring the present by the sacred practices of the past; that therefore their rare confederacies were more perfect unions, bound, as the body is, by blood; but most of all, Culp believes that the Indian is untiring, stealthy, resourceful, and stoically brave. Ah, Culp is a man of cliche the way some men are men of the cloth. Of the loincloth, Culp would certainly say. Hence he believes that the Indian is a man of honor, and a man of his word, and a man of his bond. He believes that societies without writing are spiritually free, not stupidly becalmed. He believes in killing and roasting your own meat; growing your own grain; cleaning your own fish; tanning your own hides; slaying your enemies and settling scores; living as the sun and the snow and the seasons demand, following the great herds, worshiping bears and snakes.
   Culp drives a pickup with a tarp that leaks, and fancies ponchos that let rain run down his neck. He pretends he can track, catch fish with his hands, make a fire by spinning his prick. Yet he lives in a little prefab the color of a dying daff, and has named his kids Deborah and Andrew-—Andrew for the movie Rooney, and Deborah because everybody is born a Debby these days. Andy and Debby: how do you like that? Not Mist-in-the-Morning or after the name of a friendly Indian like Wawatam, or that of the fierce and unforgiving Minava-vana, Chief of the Ojibways. No. Debby spelled D-e-b-b-y, and Andy spelled A-n-d-i-e.
   On Halloween he will set his whole troop on me, each kid naked to the waist, capering in my living room, Culp too, with his twelve war-whooping boy sopranos, his normally smirky face chalk white, cheekbones on fire with vermilion (1 always hope for frost or rain, or a sudden snow, that night), the little snots trying to scalp me because I’ve given them candy canes left from last Christmas ([but why should they complain, at least it’s not cookies containing pet poop or sneezing powder] [one of my own kids—Carl—is in their company—but how could I have decently prevented it? howling louder than all the others, the wretch, and brandishing his homemade tomahawk in my face]). Culp insists that he can interpret the ferocious designs and symbols of Iroquois war paint, and so the children cover their arms, face, and torso with egg dye and cake color, while enjoying a state of sick self-loving, sybaritic pleasure unique to the age of eleven. Culp has them rattle off the names of god knows how many American Indian tribes as though they were reciting the capitals of the States. I scarcely know the makeup of the Five Nations.
   Even at the university, he springs this Indian lingo on us as if there were a Jack-in-his-Mouth. To an innocent and normally unmeant “good morning,” he will respond with something jolly in Ojibway. To his "how!” I say “heil!” but he thinks that’s fun.
   Though Culp’s features are far from Indian, he is lean and swarthy, with dark eyes in fact like Lou's. I suddenly see that. Neighbors deceive you about the nature of the neighborhood. Another nose alters the angle of the eye. Front stoops with ethnics squatting on them do the same. Shirley Temple’s indecent gestures subvert Little Orphan Annie’s, even on the comics page. Still, from a distance, Culp seems presentable and reasonable and normal enough. Approach, however, and you'll hear whirs and clicks, rhymes and puns, jocularities in dialect, jingles in dirty high-schoolese, gibberish he says is pure Sioux.
   Culp’s conversation is made-up like his Halloween Indian’s face. It is simply streaked with zaps, wheeps, and other illustrative noises. I guess I shouldn’t say “simply” or "streaked” either. That's not exact. His speech is not outlined or punctuated with clacks or thonks in any ordinary way. It is engulfed in them—
washed with them as though they were spit—the way street sounds surround us—surrounded us, you remember? during that intense noontime tete-a-tete in a sidewalk cafe where 1 confessed my passion to an emptied cup and you lifted your chin to look coolly away; yet that comparison is not correct either, since Culp’s incessant zits, yelps, zooms, and hip hips intervene; they serve as symbols themselves and carry on the action. If his pickup hasn’t started, first we hear last night's icy wind, and the oil in the engine thicken. The truck’s doors open with a groan—which he gives us. His trousers slither over the— ah!—cold seat and the key snicks entering its lock. The engine’s frozen agonies are minutely replayed: the starter’s grind, the muffled puff of a single cylinder firing. Then the smell of a flooded engine is delicately rendered by, as if from a distance, the bassoon. Finally: zrrBLOOM! GLOOM ROOM AROOOM!
   There is palpable silence, an emptiness in the line on the page; in the corridor there is no one, or the heart. Culp shrinks. He is shifting into another scenario. His right hand becomes a dinky little car puckpuckpucketing along toward school.
   I heard not a single pucket as I approached the crowded cafe. The clatter of the city collected like lint in an unconscious corner: the corner, perhaps, the cafe was bent around. A comic strip.
   Culp loved to reenact them, enliven their lines. He was surely brought up on Mickey Mouse and Porky Pig. He falsettoes in fright, as they do; he zips, he squeals to a halt; he vaaroo-ooms; he tsks; he thonks. His thonks are worthy of the Three Stooges. He does all the Popeye voices, but prefers Olive Oyl’s. He has noises for the nittles, the grawlix, the quimps, the jams. He blows each balloon up before your ears. He reels home, +’s on his eyes, singing the spirl that rises like heat from his head.
   Don’t ask him the time. He’ll tell you it’s dong-dong-dong-a-ding and ten ticks.
   I must admit he does a nice imitation of Planmantee’s mind turning over.
   You remember? a small green hedge, not boxwood, I think, protected us from the street, and an awning, striped like peppermint, shaded us from an intense noonday sunshine which lay liquidly in the spoons. Remember? I am asking what has happened, why you’ve changed (that old bit of emotional business), and the street sounds safeguard your answer from any other ear: I believe, Bill, you do not say, I’ve finally grown up. You say, remember? you say it’s time to move out of the old neighborhood. What sounds would Culp use to render that cut?
   How can a man who wants to be an Iroquois and wipe his ass with leaves go about huffing and clacking like some rusty machine? How can a man who puns with such compulsive passion believe that there is, in fact, a wealth of wisdom in the world; that these aphorisms he collects are actually true; these gnomic
wiseguys he reveres are really honest? How, I ask in Culp’s resonant Choctaw, and in that fashion, which is firmly his, complete the joke.
   Ah, yes . . . Culp believes. He is as crammed with beliefs as peanut butter is with goodness. He believes that the hard ground is great for your back; that leaves will cure eczema, impetigo, halitosis, gonorrhea, jaundice, the jim-jams—anything, with the exception of a few inner ailments only roots reach or bark relieves, like my Gongorism, he says, which little else will touch, not even nuts which solidify the stool, or those berries which make you shit in a stream. Roots, for Culp, are another universal remedy: they can restore a missing foreskin or soothe chapped teeth. He believes, as a drunk doesn’t, in the next day. He believes that the Indian’s dogs were devoted, not just hungry; that squaws were better in their blankets than a coed on the lawn; that Indians reared their kids to be kings, breathing nobility through nostrils taught to flare; and he pa-poosed his own baby all over town to improve its disposition. Don’t pack the squimp on your back, he says, put it against your chest where it can hear the heart and smell milk. He believes that alcohol pickles the liver; that cigarettes darken the lungs like the sides of caves. Yet he loves caves, firelight, primitive man and his magic markers. He believes that savages are children, but that children are pure and upright like saplings not yet bent by the wind, not yet dampened by the rain.
   Odd that my thoughts should be interrupted by that little round marble-topped table where we sat, by a few crumbs the sparrows would eventually eat, and by the lazy strip of cellophane you’d pulled from a pack of Camel cigarettes, and which now lay across the rim of your saucer. None of this was normal for you: not the cigarettes, one of which you were trying awkwardly to extract, nor the chocolate you were drinking instead of espresso, nor the cold clench to your thin pale hands, those pensive, watchful eyes which used to moisten my face with their emotion darting by me now like startled neons, no, nor the prim white color of the collar on your blouse—not to be mussed—nor your lipstick which had a hint of purple in it like a sunset—not to be smeared. My throat was suddenly full of puns, bad jokes, and all sorts of snappy retorts like risen bile. It was awful. It was awful. She was giving me the sack. And I realized, as I formed the words, how she was also kicking me out of hers. I smiled. I smiled. Culp smiled when he sent one of his Culpagrams: WHEN THE WORM HAS EATEN THE APPLE, THE APPLE IS IN THE WORM. A smile, then, like the glassine window in a yellow envelope. I smiled. In that selfsame instant, too, I thought of the brown, redly stenciled paper bag we had the grocer refill with our breakfast oranges during the splendid summer of sex and sleep just past—of sweetly sweating together, I would have dared to describe it then, for we were wonderfully foolish and full of ourselves, and noth-
ing existed but your parted knees, my sighs, the torpid air. It was a bag—that bag—we’d become sentimental about because (its neck still twisted where we’d held it) you said it was as wrinkled and brown as my balls, and resembled an old cocoon, too, out of which we would both emerge as juicy and new as the oranges, like idtcmavc/iA vfi\yfle/oc/y,and so on, and I said to you simply, Dance the orange (a quotation from Rilke), and you said, What? There was a pause full of cafe clatter. What was 1 doing by that time—grinning like a ghoul? Thank you for making this easier for me—did you cliche say? you said. That was when you compared me to an old neighborhood. Nothing commonplace about that. There was so much blood in my head I heard you as if from a distance, as if my sinuses were stuffed. The flimsy red string of cellophane blew from the table like a strip of breeze, and I said, Thank you for shopping at IGA.
   Just as I feel the Culp come up in me when I malice my Martha, my misery, my missus, I felt it then, losing without grace or even decency the only satisfying lover in my life, because 1 had put the problem in those words: getting the sack; and then seeing only the hard oblique light from the spoons, the lift of the little length of cellophane like a sail in that short sigh of air, your smoothly filed and lacquered nails tweezing a cigarette from its pack, a fragment of tobacco clinging to one red edge, and then remembering the smell of orange peel on my fingers as if it were my own quick and not the fruit’s, each step of my mind taking me further away from what was happening (and, indeed, what was happening?), from the terrible turn in your feelings, like the corner of the cafe, because, I presume, I couldn’t bear to sit there and watch your tongue remove a small residue of chocolate from your lips the way you were removing me.
   Can 1 believe I’ve any hold on history when I find my memory is made of marimba music, sack trash, and teapot trivia? stacks of calmly folded grocery sacks, for instance, with those silly sentences stenciled on them; again, for instance, when I was having that soul-splitting quarrel with Martha, my misery, my missus, while she put away the groceries and I carefully flattened the bags and stuffed them in with the others to pretend to an accord until we’d take one out later to line the garbage can so our souls wouldn't dirty; Martha fitting the broccoli into the crisper and screaming at the rear of the refrigerator, right at the frost line; 1 recreasing the foldings in the sacks, smoothing out old wrinkles, and yelling back like a bullhorn; the milk still steady on its rack, you slimy word-snake, BARGAINS GALORE. I'll tell you what it’s like screwing you, four sticks of margarine brick up the butter keeper, a wedge of bags between tins of shortening like an elastic deck of cards, you ass- mouthed liar, AT YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD STORE, it’s like trying to fuck a cooked cabbage—after it’s set a spell—after it’s got cold—after its leaves have begun to wimp—ah, there is a
freezing wind passing through the troughs of the celery; O Koh, you—what a corny conceit!—when your dingle—you—you never say it straight, always what it’s like, not what it is, well, your prick is a Polish pickle, she resolutely shouts, setting the jar inside and softly closing the door. I do not make the expected rejoinder. Her whole body is wide and white and seems to be suddenly just like the Kelvinator; you've left me holding the bag; O, I know, I’m the gab, when what you’d like to be holding is that skinny bit of Five & Dime baggage, SHOP AT SAFEWAY IT’S SAFER; O, Martha, you mean that skinny bit of baggage that this minute’s giving me my sack back? and what does the stupid bag hold? it has held my childhood head, I remember, with scissored eyes and a painted mouth: I am the Black Knight of this one-log bridge, and you shall not cross, Friar Tuck; I’ve killed ten of King Arthur’s clumsy champions with the backside of a plow; three Billy-Goats Gruff went down as easily as swallowing lard; 1 have unhorsed a heap of hotshots, too, each wearing their milady's favor: garter, scarf, or hankie; and I've done in a dozen dragons, descaled like fish— so take that! and that! [P®w8 Well for Christ’s sake, what are you up to now, running from symbol to symbol like someone needing to pee; she did say my prick was a Polish pickle, what do you make of that? would you rather be an old neighborhood: would she have called my cock a gherkin if she had been holding a jar of those? a word with Polish roots, too, I shouldn't wonder, Indian in intention; well, I didn’t make the expected rejoinder, anticipating her reply, and considering the difference between the nature of her banter and the strength of her scream, the deliberate way she put away the groceries—this into that— nothing set down stressfully, nothing slammed or banged or battered, while the words came out of her with the violence of a sneeze.
   This minute Culp is composing a limerick concerning Hannibal’s crossing of the Alps. It is, as he says, another chapter in his limerickal history of the human race. It will have elephants in it. Hurray. That’s why I gave up poetry for history in my youth. And the novelist's art as well: he would love the way the sun lay in the bowls of our metal spoons, and the fringed shadow of the shawled edge of the candy-striped awning—see?—it is crossing the table between us as if it were a fence; and surely he would have one of us put that spoon’s light like swallowed fire in our mouth. It would not have been your mouth the spoon went into. You were there to breathe fire, not swallow it, to tell me we were now another cliche, (uncoupled cars, spilled pearls, lost gloves—unpaired, unstrung); consequently you were nervous, full of fidgets— nervous—nervous—nen’ous—nervous—nervous—nervous—nervous—nervous —and had bought a quite uncustomary pack of Camels on the way to the cafe, peeling the wrapper off in my presence just to get at a smoke, and not at all as if you were smiling at me and removing your clothes, possibly that braided
brown sash I gave you after the first time we made love in a real bed, then soon looped like a length of lust itself over the foot of it; no—it was time to burn holes in all our old habits, that was what the cigarette was for; so you scooted your chair close to the table (which certainly could have been better wiped, I could see the streaks of the rag like an added design), not to be close to me, but because it was crowded in the cafe, and 1 could not help but notice your slightly empurpled lips, freshly purchased—in a flap, in a rush—unquestionably the wrong shade, but, as it would turn out, the right shade for this occasion: “Twilight at Noon”; yet you could have been a secretary on her break, not a dime-store doxy, and this was autumn in New York, not a malt shop in Indiana, although you ordered chocolate, a childhood sweet; still you didn't put a spoon in, perhaps fearing you might spill that sunshine from the silver and set a blaze like brandy; 1 suppose it’s because I’m a little older and my age has begun to make tracks across my face like a herd of horses; I suppose it’s because I’ve added a bit of stout to my fat, and you’re jealous of my piquant little tits; since it’s certainly not because I cuff you around, have gone limp in the stiff department, lost my job, fancy another—you can’t say that—or because 1 won’t leave my wife and fly you down to Rio; no, because you want less of me, not more; you want to rezip our relationship, close up every opening, put a cork on it, call the cows in: goodbye. I can call in Culp to do the zipper’s closing. You did say something finally about why. you had found a reason, something which had been bothering you for. . . well ... a while (a while: the same sense of’while’ you might use to describe the shameful time you've nervously let pass since your fingers felt, say, a lump like a small pea in your left breast—“I’m afraid, doctor, it’s been there awhile’’); anyway, you now knew why: why? it was because I had a loathsome mind. Loathsome, was it? a word from an English movie, a word popular with girls aged fourteen. That was why? Still, I have never been sure whether you were refusing my avowal or denying its truth, denying its truth by affirming yours. Then your spoon went swiftly and silently into your cup; I felt fat thickening on me, moment by moment, like cooling gravy; and I became the man I now am.
                          I once went to bed with a nun who prayed the whole time it was done.
                             She prayed to her maker to come quick and take her, so I did as she bid and then some.
                  When I was a kid, I always found nuns a bit creepy. I never wondered what was under those black gowns (as I’m told some kids did) because whenever I
saw a nun, or even thought momentarily of one, [ also saw “death" with more detail than a youngster can comfortably stomach, so I immediately turned my mind off like a light and plunged her darkness into mine the way she, whoever she was, had blackened her body with denial—so white underneath like a sea-worm or slug in a cave, so pale she put each limb in relief against the black. 1 still feel that passing a nun on the street is more hazardous than passing a school bus. Culp is writing a series of limericks—a huge cycle, he says—endless, it seems to me—each one of which begins: I once went to bed with a nun. But in the name of Christ’s tears why, I ask him. Why nuns? What do you hope to accomplish? The limerick, he replies, making the shame-on-me sign for being such a dunce, the limerick should be blasphemous where possible—isn’t that the sainted tradition?—and always obscene. A clean limerick is an affront. The limerick is a tool, one of the skewers of Satan. It must be dirty like the toilet seats in public parks. The line which I have chosen takes care of such requirements quickly, automatically, almost prematurely, you might say, so that in the rest of the verse, I can get down to business. Culp assumes the posture of someone getting down to business. I picked nuns for the same dispassionate and professional reason that Poe chose his raven. Do you know Poe’s essay on composition? I refuse to acknowledge such a stupid question. I refrain from quoting the opening paragraph. Down to business, I say, still crookedly playing the straight, you said “down to business,” but what is a limerick’s “business”? isn’t it poetry gone out of business? isn’t it a syphilitic bum, a fraudulent bankrupt, and doesn’t it mug? isn’t it like a wino in rags? won’t we find it asog and asleep under Hart Crane’s bridge? Culp crows. I shall explain, he says, and I see once again that tutorial finger approaching my nose. He really crows: cock-a-doodle-do, and so forth. Ah, the limerick—he wets and warms his lips—the limerick has a nice, tight, hourglass figure like a Gibson girl in her corset. He grins. He loves his metaphors, his rhymes, the jingles of his mind. They make him feel happy-go-lucky, as if he has change in his pocket. Well, Koh, you know I like to undo that corset a little, let what’ll pop out pop, but basically it’s laced as tight as time is, running out; it's as closed as the candy store cash box. He does the little bell on the shop door. Ding-a-ling. Here comes Eckstein, with his huge hooked nose and greasy eyes. If Culp didn’t do Jews so well I’d think he was anti-Semitic. Eckstein looks over the counter at me. What do you want, little boy? Ah! you want an explanation of the limerick? That'll be a dime. You got a dime? I got two nickels, I say. Is that a dime?
   They sail over the ground in their long skirts, soft and full of silence, a lull before a lull, their carefully framed faces free of the wear of the world, like priests, too, plump as chickens. Brides. Like Myrna Loy—married to the Thin Man. Does He come to them in the night, when their skirts are lifted to blot
out the moon and the sky? Does He come to them in His white robes like a gathering of cloud? Do they do it by mingling their nightgowns, robe rubbing robe, and do they culminate in a sliding of silks, a gossamer gasm, a whisper of holy words? I always had so many questions, but 1 realize now that 1 didn't want real answers to any of them.
   So the point is, Culp says, the point is to use this very orderly little object (his fingers form a very orderly little object) to manufacture disorder and to confound whatever it contains. The limerick is an instrument of disrespect. It is a tune toilet, a toy box. It gossips, it slanders, it ruins, it sneers, it snobs. It is a turd tub, a cock lock. DTT 0© (Culp stands straight and stretches out his arms, he is a billboard by the roadside, a cross on a crag) AIM OMHPILIilMllllMTr @(F KIW©yUrirO®M I still don’t understand this obsession of yours. These poor nuns—they don’t live in wigwams and scalp whites; why not use abbot' or ‘cardinal’ or ‘pope,’ if you have to blaspheme? Ah . , . ah . . . you ask what 1 aim to achieve by writing so many, Culp declaims, holding up that admonishing, tutorial finger. He’s wet it. Where is the wind from? I aim to achieve perfection! He wipes his teeth clean with the backside of his tie. His teeth gleam.
   You wanted an abbot? Okay.
                              A nun fell in love with an abbot, and doffed both her vows and her habit.
                                      She was sadly dismayed, when finally laid,
                              for he fucked like a snake, not a rabbit.
   I don’t know how to respond.
   Hey, Culp says, there’s an upswing of interest in the bigot’s limerick. Is that so? How about cripples? how about the poor and the maimed? How about a series on unwed mothers? How about one on used-car salesmen who fall in love with exhaust pipes? What’s the market for fruitcakes? Nothing stirring there, he says, but the ethnic limerick is taking off.
                                 There was a young lady, a nigger, who had a remarkable figure.
                                    She was shaped like a gun, and went off just like one,
                            ’cause her butt was both handle and trigger.
That’s your version of the young lady of Niger? Sure. Hey. How about THERE WAS an OLD MAN of TOBAgo? Got to, I say. Hey. Culp grins like a mime—
a grin placed on his face like bacon on a plate. You wanted rabbits as a rhyme, remember? 1 protest. 1 really do. But it’s useless. It really is. Abbots, I said; I suggested abbots. But it’s futile. Pointless. I’ve no innocence left, no resistance. 1 am guilty of everything, or I will be. 1 want rabbits as a rhyme. I want to be raped, buggered. Finish me. Do me in. Hey, Bill, he says, grinning like a clown cut out of cardboard, you ready? Ready? Am I ever ready? My hands muff my ears. Was 1 ready for the war? I sag at the knees. Was I ready for my first lay? I act almost in tears. Culp studies me. Did I anticipate my wife’s fleshly animosities? I hunt up a hankie. Was I prepared to get the sack? Culp applauds by repeatedly parting his palms. I gently tear my hair, slap my own cheeks. He grins. Grins. He loves such antics, such sad games.
                          For hangovers it was my habit to find the hair of the dog and then grab it, but one maddened Hatter ended that matter,
                           when the hare wasn't Welsh, it was rabid.
   Anyone in my profession encounters a lot of jargon during his reading life. It is, to the eye, like polluted air, and one gets used to it, to breathing and reading shallowly, with a hankie, sometimes, in front of one’s face. But Culp’s talk was quite otherwise. It was, if you like, so free of all professional tone and temper as to be antagonistic to it. I finally realized that he spoke carefully under every subject, whatever it was; he was always a decade younger than necessary, so that if you wanted to discuss baseball, Culp became fourteen; if it were economics or sociology, he might carry on like a serious sophomore; and only about aging have I ever heard him sound mature. If the larded lingo of my colleagues—Planman-tee or Governali—made them seem wiser than they were—like sibyls: darkly oracular—and appeared to exclude those unfamiliar with it from their little community of thought, Culp’s conversation was designed to make everything appear to be stupid, callow, scarcely whelped; and his language was so gee-whizzily imprecise, so stuffed to the nut with the nonce, it was no more particular than the wind, and spoke breezily to everyone like a politician at a rally. Only the future would find what he said inexplicable, and have to hunt up each meaning as though it were commanded by a crossword; for, by definition, the nonce lingers no longer than the daylily, and disappears like that wadded-up bloom from its stem; but that’s what Culp wanted and loved: if only language were made of slang, and each word had a brief green life, a short season in our speech before blowing away, there would be no real enrichment of meaning, no investment, over time, of careful human thought in any inscription; the right rhymes would
continue to rob signs of their significance and overthrow thrones (hosanna/ba-nana, Buddha/gouda, Duke/puke); we would express ourselves in jingles:
                  My name is William Frederick Kohler, but as I grew both fat and older,
                  I lost the Willie and the Freddie, until a simple K was ready; though by the time I’m timed to die that withered K will be an I— an I that soon will melt away, and only leave this I in clay;
the soul would close and open like a shop [HAWE /$\Y [PSEILD[§)©’§]; punning would replace the rule of reason:
                               If all men were mortal as soap, for the Jews there would be little hope, since the brand they have been didn’t wash out but in, and who’d choose a Semitic soap?
and while life might become as shallow as a saucer, it couldn’t hold much hate, either; suicide would be reduced to self-deprecation: the Jew’s joke, the Polish putdown; seriousness of every kind would be canceled so the real show could go on: the Celebrity Roast. I’ve been digging into Culp’s love of noncey slanguage, and I’ve decided there has to be a lot of resentment there somewhere, an immense malice toward the mind.
   Culp recalls that I asked for a cardinal.
                            A nun went to bed with a cardinal whose tastes were quite plain, even ordinal.
                                 By raising her quim she kept him plugged in till delight came on in her cardinal.
   After that noontime nightmare, I was not to see you again (unless the future makes fun of me and turns your person up like a letter lying doggo in a drawer), though I have many times imagined a meeting between us, in another bar, perhaps, but in a bar as dark as the wood that built its booths. It’s fiveish, when life has fallen safely into the cocktail hour. The two of us are in out of the slush, out
of the cheerless cold, packages under our arms. You will wear fur-topped boots and look painfully beautiful. A beer will be brought. A sherry. Nothing more. A damp ring from my glass will lie undangerously on the table—a table whose top is so impregnated with plastic it gleams like a lake in the darkness, your moist empillowed eye catching the night’s vagrant light; yes, it would be like that: so that the drift from my glass floats liquidly along like sweat on water. Have I complained again about my age? I had become an old neighborhood, I say; you were right to move away. I’ll not mention that the waiter has forgotten to bring me my nuts. 0 che sciagura d’essere senza coglioni! 1 manage to hold my tongue without putting my hands near my mouth. I sit on my hands without sitting on my hands. That sweet smile, so malicious, so familiar, takes shape on your face—O Lou, it is painful to perceive it there, forming slowly like frost—and you lean your chin on the back of your hand—O so winsome, so appealing—while you meanly mock me. Old? I don’t know, you say, though you were always old, Bill, born old, I’ll bet, like my granddad always seemed, since I never saw him any other way than weak and wambly from my beginning to his end, well, you lived cautious, as if in a hole, drove slow, looked gray, grew old as if age were your only aim, and I . . . too young for anyone, you said, and it was true, I was, Bill, I was . . . yet we were young together once, and thin as scarves, remember? even though your breasts, Bill, were heavy anyway as mine, still, weren't we slithery in one another’s arms? wow, they’d silk about me like those scarves I snitched from the Five & Dime, those scarves whose colors ran together as our moistures did, back then, summer under summer, when you would sweat a shower on your chest, a chain of lakes between your not so manly tits, summer over summer like a heavy cloud, and you’d see colors through me so you said . . . see . . . sure . . . you said you saw . . . those were the days, before my cradle became your grave, wasn’t that the way you put it to me, Bill? spat it at me, Bill? your chewed and wadded words? ah, god, the good old days, when I said kiss me—all it took—kiss me and you came ... a youthful thing, I’d say, like the nervous spill of a boy who thinks he has you pinned in the backseat of his father's Ford but can’t get it in and gurks instead on your hand or wets your thigh, because it’s still his poppa's prick, too, he’s borrowed for the evening and can’t handle any better than he can the car, well, it was rather nice, nevertheless, for an old man to fumble and go off like a boy, a youngtime thing, though you were always old, born old, I’ll bet, old-eyed and cold inside, snowy as suet. O Lou . . . That’s when my play dreams dissipate; suddenly you are saying such things, and worse, forcing me to close down the show, distickling my Fancy. I regraze the shallow pastures of your upper thighs when suddenly you are boxing my ears. I recreate a nipple, lean near to nuzzle, when suddenly I see an unhealed wound. Daymare after daymare gallops away with your memory. Suddenly your sweet face sneers. Your soft voice curses me:
you pfimpf! you klurch! I cannot connect you any longer to my life. Not without a shock. Not even your image will behave. At least that much of you should be my slave. The fault is yours, my dear.
   Culp is here again like a nagging cough. He reminds me that I said I would prefer the pope. He is wearing a large button which says: HUT’S 1FOT TFInlll OWO&M ffiAOS OM 0NGMNA1
                               A nun went to bed with the pope, who tied her four limbs with a rope.
                                   It’s not that, my dear, you have something to fear, but I want you quite still so nothing will spill
                             when your holiness is filled by the pope.
I squat clumsily and pretend to defecate in the corridor. Is that the way to respond? Culp thinks so. I’m a card. A great kidder. A regular joe.
   I am an old neighborhood. I have a loathsome mind. You start to rise, a bit awkwardly because the chairs have been set so close together some of their wire legs have intertwined. My hands are palm up on the table in what I take to be a gesture of supplication. You are latching your purse. I remember the sound (between a click and a clack, perhaps a snock, Culp? would that be right?) and I try to scrub my mind clean of the sign’s sticky duplicities, but it’s no go. I hear Iago advising Roderigo: She must have change, she must; therefore put money in thy purse; Lou’s cunt is closing like a flytrap . . . snunk, I feel the hand’s bag; I read the pocket's book; I lap my last lap. So she stands. Has stood. I am holding my tongue while keeping my hands palm up upon the table. Perhaps someone will drop a dime in them, Bill, her voice says, for she says nothing. Her voice says, Bill. It is the last time I will hear my name in her mouth. How wise we were to meet in such a public place where it is guaranteed I will not blubber, curse, or plead. A dissolution neat as her ensemble. Bill—it begins, but then her voice breaks off, and we are broken. I am broken. Bill—That’s all. all. My god . . . all? That was all. And she is slipping sideways out of my sight. Has slipped. The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts, shall he to him shortly as hitter as coloquintida.
   Culp is wearing a large badge which reads: HB1MIIM© ®/§\(£K YIXKi Your clothes, as you rise, readjust; they slip into something smooth and stiff like the uniform of a nurse. The edge of the table presses against your belly. The purse yawns; catches the Camels; closes—they are as bitter as coloquintida—closes: snock. Dark glasses cover you suddenly with the brown of a fruit's bruise, the brown of something brown in its seeds. I am seen.
   How must it be when they go at it—Culp and his wifey. What sound accompanies the elevation of her nightie? A medal hangs from his naked neck. It says peace!
   ... to be the pressing edge ... to glimpse again your soft white shoulder . . . that nostalgia—most painful—for the flesh, that former form ... to slide your seat-slick skin ... to be the pressing edge ... 1 never understood what makes another body so appealing . . . but to glimpse again—by sorrow’s side—your soft white shoulder, soft as your slip ... is it because we age, we die? or do we die because we age? ah ... to otter on down you ... to lie along the length of you again, slide your sweat-sweet skin ... to be the caressing edge . . .
   Over the Alps on an elephant, Culp yodels, went Hannibal out of his element.
   And during that merciless noon light, Lou had delivered the final thrust, a quite conventional coup de grace. But inside the banality of the blow was a fresh blade: it was time to move to a new neighborhood. No matter the matter of it. The pain was as stale as the stars. Nothing new in it. Nor in my compliant posture: dog cower. Haven't you got our holy prepositions and positions mixed, 1 now imagine myself saying. Don’t you mean you’re thinking of moving onto a new neighbor? Which proves I am as Culpicated as ever, and unfazed, unfoxed. One Riposte on Toast. Or shall I play dazed? as if I didn’t understand? hadn’t caught the cut across my heart, even though I’d had a warding hand up? She stands, and the edge of the table presses itself against the place where she is divvied. It was that last cold and indirect caress I could not bear. Nevermore to do the downy. And so I rose—without the least sense of bloom or blush or black spot—and wriggled my way between the tiny tables—oops, so sorry, pardon me—amid the talk: Olga never thinks of me, all she does is buy shoes—the shadows are so distinct they seem made of paper—excuse me, please, that’s a nice nod, pardon me, sorry all to pieces, please excuse me, please, that’s a nice nod, pardon me, I’m sorry to my shoes, thanks, please excuse—through the clatter of the cups, spoons, Zippo snicking, auto calls, purse clush, out into and under the bright summer-swallowing autumn day, its whitewashed sky, where Lou was entering a cab, not even affording me a final flash of her leg, for her car was already drawing away from a curb gray as ash, and moving out among the other glints, while behind me whole walls of window consumed her swimming image. How wholly ordinary were we? Ah, god. Utterly.
                               A nun went to bed with a barber.
                         With his razor, she feared, he would carve her.
                           You will have to behave, for your cunt’s close shave means you steady the tool of this barber.
  Culp, l say, with wonderment like a wreath about my earnest face, don't you find those Eddie Lear-like last lines a little too predictable and pillowy? Sic et non, he says. (Geez.) Well, sure, he says agreeably, it's obviously easier to find two rhymes than three, and sure, you land soft; it does seem a cinch, he says, blowing his breath in my direction, and there’s no automatic, built-in bite to it; but the thing is, that’s exactly the challenge, Kohlee, you bet, that’s the non that says sic'em to the oke (geeeez) because it’s ten/twenty/thirty times harder to write the soft version and still come up with something snappy. Look, he says patiently, suppose 1 began, oh . . . with ... A faggot whose crimes were quite heinous . . well, a line like that lets you get ahead of it like a cop on a cycle, doesn’t it? you're there in the station when the train arrives, sure, so the problem is to create a little surprise nevertheless, like: A faggot whose crimes were quite heinous kept a switchblade sheathed in his anus . . . see, you didn’t expect that, did you? you were looking to hear rear, the old rump, all right—fond friend anus—but suntchblade, now isn’t that a punch in the plexus? yeah, and when he was screwed, his buggers were chewed... get the nice twist there? really, this scorned form requires patience—passion—art—so when he was screwed, his buggers were chewed by that asshole for which he was famous. Now isn’t that one something! Isn’t that fully as fabulous as a wash nite? My land o’ lakes! I’ve also done a dirty on the pope which demonstrates what every success succeeds in demonstrating: namely the essence of success itself. I try to stop his traffic like a cop. I know, I say, I protest, 1 DO know. I’ve heard it. You’ve told it to me. You’ve recited it. A nun went to bed with the pope, who immediately started to grope, Culp whispers, as if imparting a secret. 1 find the words dismayingly unfamiliar, but I insist on my complete recollection of them anyhow. My complaints, my avowals, are useless, of course— useless, futile—so I begin to edge away, my back to the bulletin board where Culp has tacked up a cartoon. —for the place neath her dress—1 am facing north and walking west, off even rudely where the sun sets, I’d like to sashay, but it doesn't matter, his meters follow my feet. —WtKIOCIn] OOH WAMTHi® T© H[LH§>S—he shouts in a whisper after me. 1 1
   1 do my chores. Pretend to want Martha. Because I can't dance, I take her dancing. Fancy some firelight to stare at.
   Meanwhile Culp does fowl in the barnyard, geese in the sky, a train entering a tunnel, a plane pulling out of a dive. He does dog noises. Sure. It’s no surprise. He can whine, yelp, growl, howl, and bay with the worst of them. He likes to represent to you a neighborhood in the early morning as the milkman wakes it. First the horse comes clippity down the dawning street. The bottles rattle in their wire baskets. Chinkaclink. Next: a chunk, because the cold bottom of the bottle has come to rest on the stoop. A moment of silence for rising cream. Then
one dog outcries, soon another. He hopes you will appreciate the milkman’s noisy progress. He hopes you will admire the differences of the breeds.
                                A nun went to bed with a sailor who said he had come from a whaler.
                                It was like Moby’s dick— his blubberous prick— with which he promptly assailed her.
                             And after this sailor impaled her, he said to the nun, whose voice failed her, gee whiz, madam, you ain’t built like a man, and don’t come like the boys on the whaler.
   My business is with history, my quarrel too. The things I remember about that September day: brittle little sounds speckled against all those incessant voices, monotonous as a fan's hum, the hard bright light, my palm-up, pity-imploring hands, Lou's outfit (I guess that’s the right word), her uncharacteristic cup of chocolate. Camel cigarette, and so on . . . ah, god, and the pressing edge—these do not belong in history. They lie along its lip like the milk always did around my kids' mouths. They are what clings to the spoon you've used to stir your drink, the residue which wets the saucer, which remains in the ring the cup leaves when put imprudently down on a piece of paper or on a countertop to be wiped away by a waitress.
   My feeling of being bereft, a painful numbness if that is possible, the self warding off rejection like someone dodging a blow, an awareness of how foolish 1 was, old jerk, old hat, old ... old ... no, none of that belongs to history. This is history:
                                 Over the Alps on an elephant went Hannibal out of his element, for the elephant’s motion was so like the ocean, he continually punic’d upon his best tunics,
                            and his slaves had to wash off the elephant. 1 1
   1 never know how to respond.
                     It was a bright and sunny day. I said we met in a sidewalk cafe. She entered as though in a play. The ash on the wall I was was gray. We greeted in a formal
way. Neither of us could at first find a thing to say. Is it true, what you wrote me, that you’re going away? Yes, I’m going away to stay. 1 said, Dare I tell you of my dismay? It’s a frightful decision 1 wish you’d delay. Don’t make a scene, she said, a display. The waiter's tray slid with his presence between us. A cup clicked in its saucer. My nerves had begun to fray. I feared 1 might weep and my eyes grew hot, their rims red. No last hurrah, then, no last hurray? I don’t think we should betray all our former feelings. No, my love, she said, it’s really time for me to move on to a new neighborhood. So you’ve had, from your Lou, your last lay.
   I didn't know how to respond.
   I said we met. Okay. But did we? If by ‘meeting’ one means the purposeful approximation of two or more persons, then we met—yes. A half-hostile conjunction. No touching, though. No berating. No meeting in that sense. In the sense of A Meeting, there was never any meeting. There were merely some incidents which I later shuffled together like a hand of cards and called "a meeting," and beneath which—beneath that calm and covering name— the actual events disappeared like a table under lace and embroidery. My shoes carried me there, but they were not a part of any meeting. HITLER, CHAMBERLAIN, & THEIR SUITS & SHOES, MEET IN MUNICH. The place where the meeting occurred was no more a part of our meeting, either, than the rabbit’s snare is an ear of the rabbit. The day. The autumn. Awning. Awfulness. The strip of cellophane that blew lazily away. Yet erase these, remove the waiter’s tray, the cool spoon between Lou’s long slim fingers, and there’s no meeting.
   Lou was not there when I arrived for our meeting. Our meeting had arrived ahead of her. I stood stupidly on the passersby side of the hedge and searched unsystematically for a place. The sun made my eyes smart. Two seats were vacant, but they were out of the shade—in the squint—and on one I thought I saw a smear of custard. My heart was already racing. A man with a half-eaten brioche on his plate, his last bite still visibly indented in the eaten edge, folded his Times uncomfortably under his arm and rose, without the least sense of a bud’s shape, a bloom’s beauty, or leaves disfigured by black spot, that I could see, to make undulating way between the tables (rather gracefully, I believe I thought) out into the street—a barrier which he quickly and efficiently crossed. Don’t order brioche. Okay. You said okay. Until that moment I hadn’t realized that you never said okay I say yeah a lot. More than is normal or necessary. But in your unfamiliar strict gray skirt and ununbutton-able blouse you said it: Yeah, okay, I won’t order brioche, but I do think I’ll have a cup of cocoa. Cocoa. It went wearily with my name. You came up the street, all very trim and tidy, as though on your lunch hour, secretary in the city, certainly not a clerk in a dime store anymore, now quite executive, fuck-
Sing your way up, as Culp would smugly point  out if he knew, and no longer impressed by my mind, which had become loathsome finally, or had finally been seen for what now was loathsome. In hose an heels; Ah, may no jokes culp up in my mouth in my misery may no silly sallies soil, no wounding witticisms wound. Please, no employment of my extensive verbilities. No ripostes, no rejoinders, however easy and irresistible the opening offered. Opening. Ah, god, and the pressing edge. Moist mouth. Ah...soft hole made by hand. The long warm yum of inner thigh where my lips might linger. Gone. Gone. Good god, gone. For good. God, what an expression! what an idea! I've been given the sack. I'll take any opening offered. The surface of you was all the deep I needed. And you felt surface too when my tongue, went dancing. It was precisely that touch which scarcely turned a hair along the edge of your muff, which was light as the light of a fly, that curled my soul and made you touch my ear with a moan: it was the sweet cover of the word love that made the love. Perched in your drugstore chair in such a way your seat doesn't seem to meet the seat so desirable in your natty new touch-me-notsand businesslike heel click. Don't I notice now how free of heavy jewelry your hands are, your nails of garish gloss, a tasteful oval shape instead of the glistening spear-point they once were, and how your watchband is as slim and silver as a small swift fish, that your blouse is very pretty, even if and don't I resentfully recognize that they are each one my improvement: they are my long lawn, my envied bed of blooms, bed from which I'm being barred, position of trust from which I am; after a moment here of stirring and staring down the shade has made my eyes swoon) going to be firmly and efficiently . 
NEW DOUBLESTRONG EXTRA HEAVY BAG NO DOUBLE BAGGING NEEDED
There was no meeting. Meetings are the imaginings of history. And if I had not, seen that smear of--what whas it?--custard on that chair, perhaps I would have had us sit there, in the sun's scrutiny, the glare, so severe you would have had to squint when you looked up at my woeful face when you
  spoke to my drooping ears; and maybe you wouldn’t have felt you could say the things you said if, at the same time, you were unattractively squinting, and then there wouldn’t have been any separation, either, no grim goodbye, no broken Bill—no fondleless faretheewell. But we all know that thrown shoes don’t lose battles, bring down empires either. You would not have been impeded by such a small stone flung in your path, not even by so many as would have paved it with gravel. Our inertia is so immense it causes causes to collect like dammed-up water; we must amass motives like money before we make our move; we recruit a regiment of reasons; then let them, like a firing squad, fire obediently into the helpless body of their effect. In short, Lou must have wanted to give me the sack for some time. For a considerable spell, she must have been setting her sights on a new neighborhood. Some months back, who knows exactly when? she must have decided 1 had a loathsome mind. Even when we lay together like cream cheese on a bagel, the idea had to have been forming. Even while I was mooning over her “maw,” as I affectionately called her cunt, she must have been thinking that my affection had a little loathsomeness about it. O shitty suspicion that shadows so sunny a side of my past! O crapulous thought! But that’s it. Causes collect like waste in the bowels of history. History, in fact, is horse drop, cow plop, nose snot, rope knot, flesh rot, ink blot, blood clot, street shout. Who says 1 have a loathsome mind? Who dares to say so? And every event, then, is somebody's—-something’s—stool. History has an asshole, Culp old man, 1 shall say to him tomorrow, and the present is its most immediate relief. Culp will make a glad sad consecrated grateful forlorn face which resembles the one 1 make for him, except that it will have a scoutmaster’s kindness in it. So the future is a fart then, which heralds every bowel’s movement, every new break of day.
                               A nun went to bed with Herr Hitler, whose cock just got littler and littler.
                                        0 what I would do if you was a Jew,
                                 he cried as he bit her and hit her. I I
    I recite for Culp a limerick about a young man from Perugia, but he will have none of it. Ach, all that Niger/Tiger stuff is disgusting. Why must all these creeps be from some place like Nantucket? There was a young nun from a nunnery . . . Amateurs amble over everything like cows. The A which follows so many limericks stands for Amateur, not for Anonymous. . . . who hated to
       neck, all such flummery . . . You get a line like ‘‘and his cock, when he came, cried out, ‘oogha,’ ” and you know right away the kid is going to come from Chattanooga. Put your tongue on that spot at the top of my twot, she’d say to the nuns from her nunnery. Where’s the challenge, you know? the inner art? the deep design?
          Culp, I tell him, using a juridical tone, your character doesn't compose. Here you are beating the tom-tom for the American Indian as if every one of them were running for public office; you’re boosting the simple life with all the zeal of a small-town chamber of commerce; you’re eating right, sleeping well, breathing evenly, thinking with your cleverly opposed thumbs, getting up early in the a.m., taking long hikes, keeping your prepuce loose, living like a scout; yet at the same time you are spending god knows how many hours trying to figure out what assflatulent word you can rhyme with ‘Hitler’ and ‘Hannibal’ and ‘oogha,’ and making mechanical sounds with your tongue, lips, teeth, and through your nose as though it were another mouth. Are you going to audition for Disney? And geez, Culp, those infantile puns of yours, those childish quips, your adolescent verses: you know, there’s nothing natural about them, nothing savage; 1 mean, they are total contrivances, complete artificialities; they’re cuckoo clocks. Geez, you’ve seen the stuff piled up in roadside stands, stacked up in stores, pictured in countless catalogues; it’s the world of walnut bowls and ceramic ducks—it’s a tool-shit civilization. It’s not the kind of waste you kick a few leaves over and hope to hide, I tell him. He smiles like a dog who’s just done a dirty on the rug. I mean, it’s embroidered turds, Culp, and smelly stools of Styrofoam and steel, crocks of that cheese that’s been soaked in port piss. You can’t even hole this stuff, wipe it away with a page of Monkey Ward’s, whose catalogue contains still more. I tell him he’s dealing in mind merde. 1 compare it to Chaucer chewed into learned, multilingual notes, those spitballs of scholarship; I compare it to the Spenserian Society meeting over biscuits and sherry; I say that it’s facts stuck like gull droppings to the side of history, the guano of the learned professions. Culp is impressed. We often have rant contests, although usually the subject is set in advance. I conclude that it’s like copping a feel for Flaubert. (Culp begins, softly, to croon “Yiddisha Eyes,” which compels me to continue.) Rnickknacks like yours, Chuck (he hates that name), vulgarities like the ones you extol shall overcome, shall inherit, shall overflow, the earth. Think of the crossword puzzle, for Christ’s sake, the comic strip, the joke book, the movie magazine, the almanac, the graffiti chiseled in lintels, the whole air swept and shaken by storms of insipid conversation. In any well-run society, alliteration would be a hanging offense.
          Culp hands me what he claims is his business card. One side reads like this:
Charles Culp Enterprises Ltd. Rhymes for Ritual Occassions
Birthdays Baptisms Circumcisions Christenings Betrothals Weddings Holidays Anniversaries Unctions Others **** Custom-Composed Valentines Greetings--Goodbyes Songs for Stag Parties Personalized Messages of Malediction Calumnious Couplets Cards of Condolence Stings of Scorn
   Listen, Culp says, we really agree—Kohler—you and I. We two are one. Don’t groan and make that frog’s face. Ah, the nightmare of the knickknack. Isn’t it wonderful! That’s the great aim of all these splendid artifacts, led on by the limerick, their true leader, and like the Fuhrer, their destroyer, too. What is this aim, you ask, he says, giving me the finger. To raunchify, to suburp everything, to pollute the pollutants, explode the exploded, trash the trash. It sends back that annunciatory light and returns us to the Virgin. O, Koh, the limerick is the unrefiner’s fire. It is as false and lifeless, as anonymous, as a rubber snake, a Dixie cup. It is indeed the dildo of desire! No one ever found a thought in one. No one ever found a helpful hint concerning life, a consoling sense. The feelings it harbors are the cold, the bitter, dry ones: scorn, contempt, disdain, disgust. Yes. Yet for that reason, nothing is more civilized than this simple form. In that—in cultural sophistication—it is the equal of the heroic couplet. Could Benin, with its bronzes, have produced it? could the Mayans? the Greeks even? or foully glorious Aristophanes? Nope. Only old England in the raped richness of its colonies, in its wide fiihrership of the waves. Only old
England, with its vast number of idle, overeducated queers. But this high point, you must realize, Kohler, is a low blow. That’s the lesson of the limerick. You never know when a salacious meaning will break out of a trouser. It is all surface—a truly modern shape, a model’s body. There’s no inside however long or far you travel on it, no within, no deep. So it does not merely show, you see, it shows up! It forces you to face the facts without ever producing any. The noble savage does not know disgust, of course. He does not vomit his heart out into his head. / once went to bed with a nun . . . There’s little else left of that Italianate church.
   I’ve turned his card over with a hand dealt in a crooked game. I am trying to read it while Culp rattles on and on into something like a song. I I
    I hand him back his card which he slips into his jacket pocket with a smooth whistling sound which signifies the sneak’s speed. Satisfaction is scribbled all over him like a schoolboy’s tablet. He is telling me of his new promotional scheme for the Indians. It’s called ‘‘Dial-a-Tribe.’’ His smirk is immaculate. A
few Xmases ago he gave me a large sack such as Santa might carry. Stenciled darkly on it were the words OTP© DM on one side, and TO I (Ms© on the other, and 1 feel that somehow 1 have been holding it ever since. According to Culp it is the very sack which Rigoletto used to shoulder off his mis-murdered daughter. “After the Ball Is Over,” 1 say to him. We have this little game. One of us confronts the other suddenly with a song title like “Can't Yo' Heah Me Callin’, Caroline?” The victim must then produce on the spot a pun which sums it up, which reduces it, which is an appropriate commentary. There is a little latitude, but not much. “After the Ball Is Over,” 1 say to Culp. He hesitates. “After the Ball Is Over," I repeat in a mean voice like a movie thug’s. His pause has been purposeful. It is the sandbagger’s pause. He is only a few ticks off the comic’s timing. It’s a fete accompli, Culp says solemnly, and 1 lose again as I have lost so often: bitterly, badly. My smirk is shabby. I am being a poor sport. Culp makes the chalk-one-up sign. He racks the balls. Click. Clack. He powders his cue. Grins. Grins. The kids should be in uniform for the meeting tonight, he reminds me as he prepares to quit my company, and that includes the sash with the badges. 1 am indeed a dad. Was that why Lou left me? because I was too little or too large a dad? Your kid’s not doing too badly with the badges, he tells me.
   The sack, Culp, I ask him. The bag. What am I supposed to do with it?
   Fill it with fortunes. Like policy slips. You know, From those cardboard cookies. I’m filling mine with fortunes I’ve written. They’re dillies. They—you know—rhyme.
   I don’t know how to respond.
   But boy do I hate the Boy Scouts.
   Grim day. Gray day. Tuesday. House wrapped in the wet wool of our Midwestern summers. Very like the day Planmantee invited me to his office for a little chat about Lacelli. There’s the smell of wool, too, as close as cotton in the nose. The sun is like snow on the sidewalk. Super-, Planmantee says, -ficial. But 1 am breaking through the surface, I can tell him now—I can sneer at him while 1 am announcing it; I can sneer while spitting in his face—because the other day 1 began to dig. Yes. The sound my small pick makes, inside the furnace, now I’ve begun to dig—is it two days since?—is like those eerie echoes you sometimes get in caves (oh for a footfall and a confrontation, then all would be over: found in bed with my hobby, my honey, and my hole); it’s impossible for me to tell, of course, what kind of sounds get carried through these disconnected pipes, or whether a knock or two gets up the stairs disguised as the hiccup of a ghost, or what vibrations sink inside the stones and wait there
like damp to wet a passing ear, what of my sweat seeps up the wrapped tubes to fill the fluid of the house with further fluid like mercury rising heatedly in the mouth. Caught in such a cunt will a man chew his own cock off to escape?
                                 THE QUARREL
  1 have attended many a quarrel, many a it L&fetar, yes indeed, as a contestant in most cases, of course, the Lacelli affair the foremost public bout, although one’s parents quarrel, my god yes, often in front of their applauding children (didn’t we do so in the old days, Marty? setting our dreadful example?); and the children quarrel consequently, sure, it's expected, nothing wrong in it really, simple mimicry if nothing else, natural, nothing to it; the grocer quarrels with his lock, stock, and barrels, his jumbled bins and ragged rows; the shepherd curses his sheep and their shit, their stupid ways and their incessant bleating, who wouldn’t? and the mountain's precipitous slopes, its harsh cold rocks, his cute crook, bent to make the shepherd’s life seem easy, and the goddamn Alpine flowers always underfoot, his tinted image on those picturesque postcards, too, in the distance pictured, as if you could hear them, ding dong bells; then the machinist belabors his lathe and its pubic curls; mechanics overtighten screws and block exhausts; the teacher squabbles with her subject first, then belittles her pupils, suffers their uneasy parents, who are not very professional at pretending to be proud, and finally clashes (wouldn’t the papers say? yes, her nervous pencil-raps resound like a sword repeatedly beaten upon a shield), ‘clashes,’ the word was (didn’t I decide, just now, in my mock Homeric mood?), clashes with the school board—well, so what? nothing novel there—clashes are perfectly normal, what is the purpose of the pitiless bronze? certainly labor and management cheat one another—are suspicious, sullen, lazy, greedy, deceitful, Mafia-manipulated—you name it, no surprises, ordinary shiftlessness, ordinary exploitation, ordinary rapacity; physicians pill their poor patients to death and then bill the estates, which are already being fucked over by lawyers who specialize in quarrels and in quarreling: in instigating quarrels, nurturing and sustaining quarrels, in broadening quarrels, in aggravating and deepening them, in spelling quarrels (pretending the word needs no q, arguing against doubling the r), in quarreling among themselves then, in sucking quarrels so dry they whapper back and forth like sheets in the wind (whereas the Third Reich tried to eliminate quarrelsome elements, sought peace inside itself, sought to flatten fulminations); but no one likes their state, their place, or what they're doing—the copper quarters their pockets, the two-dollar bill; thus riders kick their horses, peasants beat their oxen, dissociated personalities play mean pranks upon their not-so-innocent other selves; wars break out in the bleachers; psychoanalysts betray confidences and make out with their patients; journalists rake muck and ruin
reputations; mystics and assorted fakes, lovers, men of the cloth, the soil, the sea: all go at it. The sparrows have learned from us how to fuss and sputter, squirrels saw away at their grievances; locusts stridulate; thorns prick; aspens clatter. What a world!
   A casus belli was little Lacelli. Lacelli. Who betrayed me by being. The causa mali. Thin measly man. Leaning always to this side or that as if held up by an umbrella stand. My fault. The causa causans. 1 should have known what to expect from a name that suspended such a man from its one small eye and three ells like a marionette whose strings are tangled. What a mustache! what a mind! It was a mind that wanted to hunt through history for those events whose principal elements rhymed. The crucial question for Lacelli was simply who had pushed D’Annunzio out that open August window, and he threatened to devote his dissertation to it. I hope you choke on him, that disgrace to my native nation, Governali said. Having received news of Lacelli’s little intention (certainly not from me), Culp went prancing down the hall outside the history office singing in a high falsetto: Did Aldo Finzi do D’Annunzio inzi? Sift through Naples like the city dump it is and you won’t turn up two more differently disagreeable sorts of wop: Governali, who is a grand spray of spit, and Lacelli, who is a thin dry turd like a stretch of uncooked macaroni.
                What mustached mimic of the King of Fiume, with all the last straws from his doctoral broom, has swept our fat Heine from his Commager Chair, and left its seat shiny and ever so bare?
   Damn him. But well. In a way. The bastard did. Casus fortuitus. Wasn’t that the upshot? when my prat fell? when the soft shit hit? Ah, what a conniption Planmantee and Governali had! what a hissy fit! What a contretemps it caused! Planmantee and Governali buzzing around me like wasps and bees with their equal but opposite angers. And nearly worth it despite the bites, the stings, my painful swellings which have not yet eased, not yet subsided. Nearly worth it. Still, what a loss. 1 could have been king of this dunghill.
   Blot them out. Blot it out. THE QUARREL. Blot. Because anyway I have attended many a quarrel—more quarrels certainly than ballets, plays, and concerts—and (not counting the quarrel buried beneath the blot 1 just now used to blot it out, and setting aside as too perfect, too Platonically Ideal, the one with Martha which began that everlasting Sunday on the stroke of breakfast when Martha suddenly said, as she sliced the bread lengthwise along the loaf, “Maybe you’d like life better if it went in this direction,” achieving a surprise like that the Japanese enjoyed in their attack on Pearl Harbor, and starting a
domestic war which still continues, cutting pounds of flesh from both of us in strips like packaged bacon that, in pretend calm, we put back on ourselves when we swallow one another, so that one day we shall have accomplished a complete exchange of fats and fluids if not of bones), not one of them, no, not one of them has realized the profundity my high kick reached when 1 led the boys’ chorus in the twelfth-grade Follies, flashing pink underwear like a silk light when I flung my downy leg up. Beneath my bloomers, 1 had no penis that day, and I was wow, a hit, the promise of a great lay. But the audience was as much amused by the woman who wasn’t there as by the woman who was. Well, not a woman, really, not so big a bust, not so big a bottom, not so big an avaricious eye. Under that girl there was a boy, Culp would have said; and what was I doing to her? feeling around? blending in? humping my twin? Culpagram coming up, I’m afraid. It goes: when the plumb sways, nothing’s plumbed. Quarrels are like that: flounce and flash. Alleys of tin pans rocketing around. Though full of that celebrated sound and fury, the quarrel is—in firm fact, students, in sober truth—all sign; but unlike most signs which naively point in the direction of their meanings like a hunting dog, the quarrel manages to quail us away from the nest which conceals the speckled eggs or the hungry, cacking young, by feigning a wimpled wing and awkward walk to which we give our stupidly misguided and predatory attention. In that sense, the quarrel is like a work of art: all sentiment and sensation, all flounce and flash, hairy legs hung from a silk dress.
                                   THE QUARREL
   A scream, a blow, a stomp, a roar, a curse, the hateful lines which anger draws on an otherwise vacant face, the proud stalk, the strategic weep, each of these devices is as easily produced as a fart, and has, to its nature, no more substance. Yet that obnoxious effluvium may be actually air from an injury, the breath of a mortally winded bellows, a costly loss which is cast in our school play as a cheap joke—a la Culp, helas—death, for instance, dressed in diapers—and we don’t fail to whiff the rumpus that’s been released; we wrinkle our nose, snort, smile, stare at the wall or an early star, and ignore the boiling bowel that produced it, the burning within which gave off such stinking smoke. My tunnel is my quarrel with the earth. The quarrel is the play, but not the producer.
   There may be some truth in what you say, Herschel says, with his customary Cream of Wheat agreement: mildness of a sort which could never cause a bilious blowup, bland as ordinary atmosphere and nearly as impalpable. I call him the hedgehog because he is such a believer in both sides. You have a point, he likes to say, he enjoys saying; there is more than a little merit in that, he declares, as if removing a pipe from his mouth (actually, Herschel never declares,
or asserts, or avers—I do that, Governali avows and Planmantee affirms; they do that—Herschel assents, or suggests; he elaborates, or gently opines); yes, well, what you say seems, yes, well, plausible to me, upon my brief entertainment of it anyway, yes, at first glance a nice notion, on the face of it a pleasant guise; but will such an idea survive a long haul over stony ground, you think? the scrutiny of a dental pick? the footsteps of many a traveler across the same ground? and will it survive journalists and cameramen, you know? town meetings? picnics spread out abundantly upon?
   I walk to my window, that gloomy schoolroom slate where my words congeal like cold smoke, and there 1 write THE QUARREL on it in the style of a Roman wall. Beneath it the number 1 will soon arrive, then the letter a, and often after that a single paren and the tiny i which multiplies as pickets do to form a fence. Each will designate a place within my subject, less substantial than that which stands so solidly above it, subordinate of course, but deeper in, for I indent as 1 drop toward the bottom of the board, and in that way mark our march to the interior. The quarrel has a structure and a destiny which are quite definable, but it never delivers itself to observers so directly, or follows its own outline like a loving finger. That is the habit of the orator or lecturer. Instead, it flings its hardened grains of feeling into space, and at our faces, like a repeated pelt of stones. The students will never understand my passionate and detailed exposition of the origins of war or my claim that they are to be found in the domestic character of quarreling, because to understand—ah, to understand—that will require them to stand thenceforward under (a period and a place as awkward as the phrase), to accept their limitations, to risk being pissed on; and my students (sweet Americans, almost every one) dutifully believe in equality, hygiene, and safety; they believe that it’s in all ways a bad business to be pissed on; they live like Flatland royalty in a world where everyone is king and no one is the mountain. My students (sweet Americans, almost every one) wish to move through life like a referee’s whistle—without further physical accretion—taking in only that which may be immediately trilled, and trusting that their spit will lubricate the wooden ball in the barrel. The soul shall not grow old, gain weight, or wrinkle either, but shall remain lean as a saint’s: certifiably efficient and ineffably stupid. The abyss is before them, 1 tell them, so they naturally cherish whatever will shield them from this fact, whatever will float over that hole (as they imagine it) like a lily, padding the dreadful pond and hiding all that soiled breath and fallen sky. ©©©MU Abyss doom bah, Culp says. Through a carelessly open door, Culp has caught sight of the words on the blackboard and with his customary bad manners pantomimes a cheer first, then a cheering crowd. It’s true, though, that 'abyss’ makes an absurd sound and that it has become an absurd word: “After five
years of victorious struggle, continuous triumph, and the unstinting sacrifice of his people, DerFuhrer had nevertheless brought Germany to the edge of the abyss.” There is evidently but the one abyss. There is no abyss in Trenton, New Jersey. There is a Blue Hole in Ohio, and one remembers, from the map, the name of the Pacific Deep and the Philippine Trench, but about a Boston Abyss, a Pensacola or a Butte Abyss, there is no hint. In folklore, cliffs line the edge of the abyss like ladyfingers around a bowl of Christmas trifle. Indeed, sometimes the abyss seems scarcely more than edge. Actually, a long lawn dotted with white chairs gently reclines toward the abyss. Images of the abyss are always inadequate. Saturn swallowing his children is an arresting one. The perceptions which enter the restless panther’s eye, in Rilke’s poem, and which slide through the nervous tension of the limbs to be snuffed out in the bitter darkness of its heart: that image is an even better one, for if the abyss has an opening, it is the parted lid. The abyss shucks one like corn. The abyss is the nothingness you occupy when you are merely seen, simply sensed; when your image goes on tickulating though the tock is stopped; when you become a ghost that cannot haunt a house or heart or thought.
   The abyss exists only in English. Der Abgrund, le gouffre; they can’t express it. Le gouffre is a furry mammal. Der Abgrund is the ultimate basis for an illicit negotiation. The Greeks thought there were many roads to hell. They were right; however, the English have signposted only one: the abyss. Some think that the abyss is the space Satan fell through when he became the first outcast, but that allows the abyss to touch its toes: as if one went thus-and-so-far down like an anvil falling forty years to arrive at those literary lakes of fire and smoking rivers of molten ore and loud flocks of acid-shitting birds and all that moaning like a great wind; and then once there—the anvil having docked—to watch the tourists being taken through in loads measurable only by the seats in a Greyhound bus, listening to their guide as though they were in Mammoth Cave, and covering their cameras in disgust.
                           NO PICTURES PLEASE FLASHBULBS DISTURB THE DEMONS
   The abyss is not geographical like the Grand Canyon, which isn’t an abyss any more than the cleft between my breasts is. Nor do you go over the abyss, for instance in a barrel, as you might Niagara Falls. The abyss doesn’t gape; it doesn’t yawn; it has better manners; it is always awake, open like a lively eye; nor is the abyss funnel-shaped, or a bag without a bottom; the abyss goes nowhere; the abyss is the obliteration of the sign; it is reality without disguise, without appearance, without remainder. The abyss is not merely where the
soul goes when it’s gone; it’s where the self is exposed like sensitive paper, till, exhausted, it draws a blank. That is the abyss. Oh Lou, in you, 1 was at the legendary edge of the abyss. The abyss is honest absence; it is not just the word wool-gathering; it is true not-being-there. It is nein da sein, Culp yodels.
            DO NOT SCORN THE PITIFUL AND ABANDONED THEIR DAILY RATION ALREADY CONTAINS THE RIGHT AMOUNT
It is difficult to stop talking about the abyss because one is so fearful of it and because nothing can be said. Behind Culp and his profound superficialities, beneath the oil slick or what all film registers, is—nevertheless—the abyss. The abyss is not the departure of the thing behind that surface, nor is it a reflection of outer space that’s somehow been trapped inside the earth; it is the utter absence of significance; it is the world as unread and unreadable. It is das Ding an sich. I will not strike the abyss in my basement like a passing pipe, however deep I dig, or cleverly turn my tunnel—the abyss is not a vein of gold, a glut of oil— but 1 may do better than strike it rich: I may become the abyss myself.
  ’Doom’ has become a comic word as well: “Der Fiihrer went recklessly to his doom." It’s silly—‘doom.’ But I write down ‘doom’—I prefer the word doom’ to others—because of its skull-like eye-holes, sockets into which darkness can be screwed like a dead bulb. Sein Schicksal ereilte ihn. Adolf Hitler could go to his doom because he had one. Only those who have made a pact with the devil have a doom. Hitler, Faust, Don Juan, Leverkuhn, have dooms. I’m sure none of my students merits such distinction. The devil does not sign contracts with just anyone. Upon the tens of tons of anonymous millions, no judgment is pronounced. For them there is death, of course, but no doom. The trouble with history is its incorrigible and horrifying honesty. Only the truly doomed matter a damn to it. History is the abyss of the doomed. How does that hit you, Henry? Doom. Yes. ‘Doom’ is securely Middle English. ‘Doom’ is not der Schicksal. Der Schicksal cannot hack it. Der Schicksal is a shop where you can buy pork. So I write down 'doom'—I prefer the word ‘doom’ to its brothers—because it looks like a busker’s malevolent mask; the consonants hook over the ears. And those same ears do not fail to hear the snickers which arise from my class like a rustle of leaves when I complete block-lettering the big pair on the blackboard and turn my unsmiling face to face them. Damn you, I think. What do you aspire to? Nothing. Me too. But I want to be made an offer. I want a doom to go to. I aspire to the abyss.
                                  THE QUARREL
  The quarrel has, first of all (and this makes it quite unlike the abyss), a bottom, a base, its secret cause and condition, its complex and poisonous source.
Three factors feed this source (for sources have sources, and so on): my history prior to Martha (to select an example quite at random, but one rich with instruction), Martha’s history prior to my presence on her scene, and then the history we have had in bed, at board, up country together. Ah, bliss! Ah, misery! Yes, I have made a copy of Baudelaire’s suicide note. I keep a collection. “The fatigue of going to sleep and the fatigue of waking up have become insupportable.” Time to change beds, everyone! Next, the quarrel must have its formal field, a ring or arena which forcibly contains the contestants (marries them, so to speak), because if even one of them can avoid the dispute while achieving its aim, you can bet that’ll be the bugger who will take a walk, back off, lose interest, quit the game. «[I am not considering under this heading any cases of kowtow; I am not thinking of the grovel or some other act of obeisance, such as fetching your perfectly able spouse a glass of water, or of those instances in which you bow to someone’s superior strength or prior right (that, of course, has happened to me often enough, and each incident is vividly etched—as they say—on my memory like a dog tag around my neck, anchor on the arm, rose on my inner thigh). I am simply recognizing the fact that the bully feels as cornered and forced to fight as the victim of his bullying does. *f So our pit must have barred gates and high sides, legalities like wires, otherwise our bulls, our bulldogs, fighting cocks and bears, will fall asleep or run away. Nevertheless, we shall not have to look hard or go far to find one—a fair field, 1 mean. Most likely we come to the contest already in chains. The love nest is a Roman coliseum. There have been more fights than fucks in those parked automobiles. The nursery is where you beat the baby; where the bellowing comes from both sides; where the crib is shaken in a wind of helpless anger. And no one needs to be reminded that the castle which is Everyman’s rose-covered country cottage has cold wet walls, dark back stairs, dungeons, roaches, stinking johns, rats which harbor plague-infested fleas. If we look warily about, we shall find we are a fly in many webs at once. (Or should I say we are a fly, at once, in many webs?) <J The students are weary of my cheerless aphorisms, my Culpagrams. These pithy sayings got written down in the old days; they were guides for the good conduct of life, mottoes hung up in the head,
but now their bored fingers fiddle with those cheap felt-tipped pens, and the eyes, which once ran hands excitedly along a tablet's laddered courses as if heading up a thigh, look on in puzzled wonder while I rant. Highlight me, dammit. Run yellow lines over my voice. To those students a paperback book is a disposable rag. It gives them a hankie to honk their heads in. The subject, students, is the aphorism, or the quarrel between form and content. When sentences are sufficiently condensed the sweetness gets squeezed out, I tell them. I ask if they know any cheerful ones. Aphorisms, I mean. Silence greets that. At
least one dumbo out of this herd ought to offer me a proverb. What does Culp call them? His slobwebs. “Little by little small things don’t get large." Silence greets that. The slogan is also short, 1 say, but in the slogan’s case it is the thought that gets trimmed. And set aside. You know. Like fat. Silence greets that. Brief entreaties are common, terse petitions frequent. The subject, students, appears to be brevity. Brevity is not the soul of wit, of course, but its body. Prayerful outcries are curt because they neglect to stipulate the grounds for their request. Whines without whys. No response. They couldn't take a shit without consulting a pony. God Bless This Hap-py Home, for instance. JESUS SAVES is a slogan, okay? How about WORK IS SALVATION? whereas “Never underestimate your insignificance in the eyes of others” is an aphorism. The students were expecting a mini-lecture on Wolfgang Rapp's abortive Putsch and the government’s failure to disband the Freikorps. Not that they are disappointed. Since it is nearly impossible to interest them, it is also nearly impossible to disappoint them. They study the initials carved in the paddle-like right arms of their chairs. Lefties may use their laps. Lefties must use their laps. The students are diligent. They darken the designs with pencil points. They lay up in little abysses like boats in a bayou. Playing with words is a sign of an infantile imagination; it is worse than playing with your tiddlywiddler; it displays a gruesome . . . what was it? it demonstrates a disagreeable . . . deplorable . . . no—it argues a ... a loathsome mind. Sometimes I modestly attribute my own smart remarks to Benjamin Franklin or Aaron Burr. The students are still and their silence continues. They are confident. They are silent. They are still. They know nothing. It comforts them. It promotes peace. Their heads are as empty as the hole the anvil did an Alice in for forty nights some days ago only to light in a lake of fire on whose ordered surface like a gas grill the shadows of the acid-shitting birds are sharply defined, and upon whose verge the tourists stand, shading their shutters. Just as well, for if the students knew what I know (and won’t teach them), they would run amok with their felt pens and bobbies, defacing bystanders and marking up other innocents. Life will get you bastards yet. Where was I? In the pit. The tourists are alighting, like the anvils, from their buses. KERSPLUNK! An anvil arrives with a toot like a train. Anvils are arriving at notorious intervals. It is raining cats and anvils. Forty trains a day are skyjacked while hurtling through the abyss by abyss-pirates.
                                  DO NOT DIVE
          THE LAKE IS TOO SHALLOW FOR SWIMMING All my designs are dimming. It begins to rain anvils and dogs.
                                 THE QUARREL
                 So far, then, we have our secret reasons, our almost ancestral resentments, the grave grounds for the quarrel, and we are also in possession of the cornered
combatants. Now we must imagine that a threat to that secrecy has somehow arisen, as if a fox had entered a quail’s quiet field. Where was I? In the pit. Yes.
I remember I said of the abyss—inaccurately—that it was das Ding an sich, but actually it is das Ding an sich as if seen. Seen. Not, therefore, by the mind, which always meddles, but by the eye, and 1 alone. The lid lifts. “It" looks at what was me, and I look back at the abyss.
   So far, then, we have that slid-up skirt in one of the front seats. This time, I think, it has been accidentally elevated. Alas! what joy! what misery! A foo-faraw must be devised as a deception. The quail will wimple across the meadow. This constitutes—this foofaraw—the quarrel proper and includes the complaints, the insults, the slaps, the slammed doors and broken dishes. One used to get a little nookie at the end as a reward. No more. This concluding phase (of which probably not another word will be said) is quaintly called "making up." Cliches are brief because they must be easily remembered, frequently repeated, and because their meaning needs to be forgotten immediately. Hence the honesty of the original expression, which plainly says that the reconciliation is imaginary and cosmetic, is confused with the idea of becoming mates again, i.e., “mate up.” No more. Well. I have broken one cutting board, one trivet, one plate, my reading glasses, the spines of several books, and a couple of ghastly plastic bowls which were supposed to be unbreakable. That break cut one of our quarrels short, I remember. 1 bled, Martha said, like the pig 1 was. Bowls and bombs don’t explode and hurt people, people explode and hurt people—isn’t that the sainted slogan? The cat began to lap up my little spots of blood, my bloodlets. I kicked at the cat with some sincerity and we nearly suffered another outbreak. You never liked those bowls. You are correct, kiddo; 1 never liked them; 1 remember how they were displayed (hung from strips and blown back and forth by fans, 1 think) so that at least two of them would be clacking together at any time to create a noise of repellent irregularity: safe for this, safe for that; won’t chip, won’t scratch, won’t break; won't craze, stain, or discolor; won t fade, melt, or buckle—won’t, won’t, won’t. You said you liked them when we bought them, I remember, and I remember you said the display was clever. I did say I liked them, you are quite right, kiddo, but I’m glad one of them is done for and dead and I’m delighted only the ugly cousin’s left and 1 heartily hope whatever its sex (let’s say it’s a she on account of the bowl’s breast shape), that she’s sent to the country to serve swine their swine-slop. Why did you say you liked them if you didn't like them? 1 said 1 liked them to please you. To please me? a first! even a second and a third! a clean sweep! to please me? Well, you liked them, so I thought what the hell I’ll like them too, but 1 never liked the display—that perversion of the wind chime—that chink-a-dink cacophony—it was a pain in the eye, in the ear, in
the ass. You thought you’d indulge me, is that it? patronize me, right? I did it to confuse you; I did it to irregularize your habits and expectations; 1 did it to fuck you up. I can bet—boy—I could bet my butt and get back a chorus. Just keep that bloodthirsty cat out of the kitchen. Thank god you got cut in the kitchen instead of in the living room. There’s nothing as handily smashable in the living room; I could have broken up your collection of coral, I guess, and gotten a cut like this. You’d have liked that, wouldn’t you, smashing my coral? what a lot of little creatures have taken centuries to stick together. What? and leaked blood on your precious rug? You have never liked that rug, have you? I know I've always said I didn’t like it, but I like it all right; I like it comme si, comme seesaw; I like it so-so. Why did you say you didn’t like it, then? To see if you’d buy it to spite me; to see if my opinion mattered; to fuck you up. Well, I knew you liked it. I didn’t like it. I knew you’d come to like it, and you just said you have. I haven't come to like it; I definitely don’t like it. You’ll like it all right—you’ll like it well enough—in time you’ll like it fine. What I really don’t like is the furniture you’ve got squatting on it: I don’t like chairs with carved arms; 1 don’t like chests held up by bears; I don't like that damn dung-colored vine-entangled rug. You don’t like me is what you mean. What I like— What you like is to break things. Kidsy, you are correct; I like to break things. It’s me you wish you were breaking. You are entirely correct again, kidsy, but you won’t break—pillows and puddings and spoonfuls of smooth white lard can’t break— even bread will break, waves break, fasts break, but you won't break—won’t, won’t, won’t. That bowl when it broke could have cut me, the way those pieces flew. Well it didn’t—a piece cut me, the way those pieces flew. The bowl took its revenge on you—the way those pieces flew—you banged it about so. I should bleed into its grinning twin—so far still whole, 1 see, and the color of something sick, so I think it may just die, wither, fade away, and never suffer busting. I don’t want one drop of your racist play-blood in my bowl—the thought makes my stomach turn. Have we got any Band-Aids? Pinch it shut. Too late; I’ve been slit open like an envelope. Everything is open, even on Sunday, so I can pick up some Band-Aids anytime. What? you’ll wait until after I’ve done a Petronius into your puke basin? —yeah, it looks like a turned-out tummy, come to think. I won’t have you peeing in it, either. Too late; too late for everything. Hold the cut closed. I need a big Band-Aid: do we have any big Band-Aids? Pinch it shut. Too late. At least it’s a clean cut. Cuts from coral are supposed to be nasty. Good, I like that supposition. Damn, I've been cut open like a piece of cake. Listen at that, world, my SS honey fancies himself a sweet. I’ll wipe up the blood if you’ll sweep up the glass. It isn’t glass, and why the hell should I? why should I clean up after your brutalities? I was making a point. Listen at that! making a point! a foul shot like in basketball, isn’t it? making a
point! hear that? that’s the sound a bowl-breaker makes. Get the glass up like a good girl. I'm not a good girl, damn you. That’s right, good girls don’t swear; but be a good kid, anyway, and get the glass. It’s not glass. It behaved like glass and whatever acts like glass is glass and you’ll pick it up because I sure as hell won’t—I won’t, ma'am, won’t, won’t—because otherwise you’ll get slivers in your tootsies, because your feet are bare beneath that muumuu, aren’t they? sure, as always. Look out, you’re dripping fresh blood new places. Oh god— open like an outcry. Even on Sunday, everything’s open, so I can get you some big Band-Aids and some of that painless tape and some aspirin if it turns out we’re out. My god, but it’s beginning to hurt. Take an aspirin—-that’s what you always advise me to do when I monthly. My clothes gape, the front door’s ajar, the drapes droop, keyholes are staring. You suppose someone saw? Someone certainly heard. You shout so. It was nothing. You bang about. So tell me now whether I’ll feel bad tomorrow because I broke the bowl? is this glass-assed plastic bowl a symbol of our marriage? You never liked our marriage either. You are correct. Don’t call me kiddo. Okay, all kiddo-ing aside. And I feel bad you broke it, even if you don't feel bad you broke it; it wasn’t a bad bowl, even if you don’t think much of chartreuse—it's a fashionable color—and it wasn’t a bad bowl; it was a useful bowl; I used it all the time—once a week anyway—I liked it. It was an overpriced piece of crap. Can’t even tell what shade it was now; all the color has leached out of the shards. Am I pale? I’m leaking a lot; I must be pale. I thought you said you liked it though. That was your lousy rug I said I liked. Liar—you said when we bought them that you liked them both— the chartreuse one as well as the ruby one. As samples of overpriced plastic shit, I suppose they were okay. When we bought them that’s what you said: you said you liked them. Christ, Martha, christ, that was then.
                                   THE QUARREL
Grim. «j The abyss, to continue off my Kantian course, plunges everything into the emptiness of space and time, into the senselessness of the senses by themselves, those senses whose function it is endlessly to prolong every axis—x spread out like a whorelet on a bed—to widen and deepen y and z—to widen and deepen to infinity—thus the abyss is the swelling of Substance like a sore place; it is an inflammation in the je ne sais quoi.
                                   THE QUARREL
Grim. *| Martha, for her part, tears things up; she can make a proclamation out of a swift rip; she can confetti an entire chapter of one’s life in a matter of minutes; and that’s why I say she tears things up rather than down or—as is implied—apart, because the bits get flung in my face, are tossed with an angry gaiety into space, settle like snow in the stairwell, cloud and then petal the coffee table (mornings I may find a lonely confetto in a comer): Martha tore up both
the canceled checks and the check stubs, for instance, that time she overdrew our account and I called her on it; then there was the letter from Lou I had the reckless bad manners to read aloud (a story in itself, as they say), which she snatched from my hand in mid-recital and, holding the pinkish paper pinched at one end as you might someone’s filthy hankie, nibbled it into nothingness with her nails; or that memorable night she made rents in our bedsheets with her teeth and then slowly ripped them into long thin strips, weeping at what she was doing because she fancied the design, but persisting because something like that, once begun, like hacking up a body, cannot be left uncompleted; and of course I cannot forget the pair of symphony tickets she chewed into sodden wads the afternoon after school when I slipped a breast out of that student's bra (it was little Rue—what work it was to coax that lovely nipple to my mouth! cliche calls it a berry, got that right, it was), and consequently got home late and hot under the zipper (you got that roll warm in another oven, Marty yelled, though she knew nothing of Ruth’s existence, and got destructively angry when 1 laughed, and angrier still when she realized that 1 didn't mind missing Franck and Delibes, it was a blessing, by god); then once she picked apart a paper cup after a party (who was it who had snuffed her butts in the bottom?) so the cup looked like buzzards had been at it (I wasn’t the object of her anger that time); what else? the sports pages are often thrown about in large soft wads or occasionally kicked and trampled; and I remember a pinup poster advertising automotive parts which she carefully divisibled into a stack of two-inch squares, and the wrappings around an ill-intentioned Christmas gift which were shredded like salad and presented to me on a smeary plate; oh, and she’s undone underwear of all sorts, pulling at opposing parts of panties until a seam gives (self-rape, sometimes, 1 think, but also the natural action of her hips as they enlarge), and there have been innumerable napkins, doilies ditto, snapshots of me dressed like a barrel of beer, as the face on the barroom floor, and in other compromising positions—as Santa Claus exposing his belly, in my Brown Shirt rig (what an unhappy Halloween that was)—which have suffered a similar fate, like the cardboard coaster with the three overlapping circles on it, representing, I imagine, the damp squatprints of sweaty glasses, she broke into bits like a table water biscuit (one ring was my mouth, she said, one was my asshole, while—it’s strange— I've forgotten what part of my pulled-apart person the third ring was—Pentheus? Orpheus? who else?); anyway, she fancies these merrie melodramatics, and they are usually harmless enough, for instance, when she tried to tear up a two-dollar bill in the face of a resistance by the U.S. mint which was better than the bowl’s, prompting me to suggest a pair of scissors, a suggestion she refused, being in a bad mood, and feeling, as she said, like a two-dollar whore. *\ You mean, I said, like a whore with two bucks and no scissors.
                                  THE QUARREL
  Well, class, we were trying to make some sense of the quarrel the last time we met, you may remember, and the reason for our doing that was my belief that war works in history the way the quarrel works in a marriage, or somewhat the way a feud functions in a backward society. 1 never meant to suggest that nations at war must have been in love with one another once, but obviously every case of military conflict involves a vital relationship which has gone, or is going, sour. Wars don’t necessarily make permanent enemies any more than quarrels do. We are friendlier with the Japanese now than we were before the Pacific war. 1 pointed out that, like quarrels, too, the loser may not be the loser. Results are deceptive. If the American Civil War was, as some think, a conflict between industry and agriculture, then, given the pressures of history, industry would have won its war whether the North did or not. Actually, at the most pertinent level of historical abstraction (i.e., Time), this war simply signified the birth pangs of the twentieth century, for our century was born a few weeks before Appomattox in 1865—in front of the logs at Bloody Angle where Grant invented victory by means of materiel superiority and attrition. That century lasted until 1945 and died its dumb brute’s death at Hiroshima when Harry Truman ordered the sorry epoch destroyed. That wasn’t wise, in my opinion, because the twentieth century was to be ours, and ours alone, while it lasted, awful as it was. Centuries are no longer those genial 150-year stretches which we once enjoyed. Centuries, now, are considerably shorter. The life span of eras approaches fifty. Anyway, my point was that the new age will arrive willy-nilly like a weight in a void. Where was I? In the pit. I work with a wet handkerchief across my face because, in that cramped space, it takes only a few blows to raise dust enough to engulf me. Surely deep dirt will be less powdery—more like earth and less like air. I suffer from black snot now. Martha has begun to watch me wash. My most recent apergu is that jailers are jealous of the freedom of their prisoners. If we had the true and complete history of one man—which would be the history of his head—we would sign the warrants and end ourselves forever, not because of the wickedness we would find within that man, no, but because of the meagerness of feeling, the miniaturization of meaning, the pettiness of ambition, the vulgarities, the vanities, the diminution of intelligence, the endless trivia we’d encounter, the ever present dust. I need better tools. I need goggles, picks and shovels, an auger, gloves, flash, hardhat, mask. Or should I be sporting and create my own excavation equipment out of sardine tins and bedspring wire? It is already obvious, isn’t it? that Germany was not the loser of our last European war (if we set aside her present schizophrenia), Great Britain was. All that's left of it is England like a set of trophy antlers. Martha always wants to play some stupid tune or other to
honor Harry Truman, but I've glued two of the white keys together and 1 want to watch her face cloud the next time she plays “The Missouri Waltz.” It is probably too late to fight back, yet I have to do something, life has come to an unquiet stall, and I am gathering dust like the rest of her ruck. We were so commodious once, but this house has eaten itself small, stuffed as it is now with outsize Victoriana and malevolent geegaws. Dressers like a line of sideshow fatties crowd one upstairs hall, each one haunted by its ranks of empty drawers. 1 am, myself, an outsize malevolent geegaw. I sit here and stare at the machine which makes me go on. 1 shall need identity papers, passport, map. Ach, what a task my dreams have drawn me into! Men heave chiffoniers and wardrobes into this house as if it were a haven for the secondhand. Martha wipes them off and cleans them out and neatly lines all the drawers with fresh old newspaper. She measures them and places them, finally, here and there, where they draw rectangles around their inner darkness, sustaining out of sight and far from breathing a kind of closet air. As far as I can see, she stores nothing in them. 1 shall need a compass, matches in a waterproof container, cardboard suitcase, some sort of story, a little string or twine. Cultures exist in different times and climates like the stars, and that, class, is our present misery. I carry on the spirit of Flaubert, but even he has a heavy corpse. 1 shall not quote Flaubert to this crowd or mention any other hater of mankind. Take a vacation from your constant confrontations, 1 tell them; lift your noses from your beer; get off the pot; forsake a sit-in for a thoughtful walk; go deep into the country some quiet Sunday, away from loud talk, sing-alongs, bullhorns, gropes, and the cops; stand still as a listening animal and listen; then you will hear it: Time’s labored breathing—somewhat like the sea’s heave—the death rattle of History. Vietnam. Dear me. You’ve frightful manners and no perspective. You read one word and think you recognize the world. Vietnam is simply the latest in our lengthy run of Asian wars. These will conclude with the downfall of the West and the collapse of European culture. Ho hum. Who cares? But you don’t think of yourselves as Europeans, do you? you simple Illini, you down-home Hoosiers, you cornrow Hawkeyes—god, no—you’ve put away your past like a mothballed fleet; yet, sad to say, you are Europe's last legs. You’ve got to stop watching the second hand and look at the slow sweep of the centuries: at what the Greeks began and where Rome reached. Governali is right, our culture has always ridden on the forward flow of the future, and you were its leading edge, my little darlings—even that dolly from Elkhart with her skirt hiked halfway to her navel? Ho hum. Who cares? Halfway from where? One day, will her cunt crack open and a Hero bellow his way into being? What a miracle that would be! Time after time, Time has turned upon itself, and the past has overtaken the present as if to say: there shall be no tomorrow unless
it is yesterday. Christianity—a Semitic substance, never forget—seeped into the pagan bloodline like a pollutant into a stream, and sickened the mind; it perverted that Greek worldword, XoYOs, with which every rational thought begins, and darkened its outline. Although the Islamic threat was turned back, Christianity and Judaism sullied those white Roman robes with their benighted mysticisms. Then finally, my simple friends—and the way you behave, I cannot approach you without condescension—the European head began to clear, the ideas of Greece became our proper ideals again, the clouds rolled back, the sun appeared upon a peal of trumpets, and the word was rescued from monastic servitude, from writing, and returned to the mouth again. The soul sang! Remember: every real rebirth is Physical, Pagan, Pantheistic, Positivist, Philosophical, Fun. (Good heavens—hear me!—I’ve got my Planmantee voice turned on.) Our forefathers, who brought forth, as we say, this country, were themselves the product of the Enlightenment, the children of reason. But now— Now— You don't know when our Asian wars began, of course, in those little teenage Balkan rumbles, in those piddly disputes which nevertheless drove the Turks out of Tripoli, for example, and kept the coastal lands of the Mediterranean largely European. Austria had already declared war on Serbia (to set off another petty Balkan kuddlmuddl) when the Russians started to mobilize along the German and Austrian frontiers. Learning this, as it was intended they should, the German government sent the czar a shut-up-shop sign, and when this friendly ultimatum was ignored, the first Asian war began. PLAY BRAWL, Culp shouts down the length of the corridor upon hearing the sirens outside. That was August i, 1914. A nice simple date. A simple time. The fighting in France, which some film may have made familiar to you, was a civil war really, West versus West, a badly managed divorce case, and it obscured the true Causes, Conditions, Character, and Consequences of the Conflict in the East. World War II, about which even more movies have been made, and about which you therefore have even more misinformation, was also deceptively cut, this time into three racial and regional pieces, so that when the Germans invaded Russia again the action was not immediately seen as the grand opening of the second Asian war; nor was the fighting in the Pacific, which followed almost immediately afterward, properly numbered III. The fourth, of course, we fought in Korea. No trouble noticing that. And so yours, kids, is the fifth—the fifth. It's been a long bout. We lost the first two rounds (we were confused, you see, about our purposes and our real opponent); we won the third rather decisively, and fought the fourth to a draw. But we have begun to tire in the fifth; we are well behind on points by this time; our enemy is patient, in better shape, and prepared for a long fight; we appear to have lost the small heart we had. Peace. Yes. Peace to the daffodils, the daisies. You flower chil-
dren are ready for the vases. Dope is just one of the enemy’s weapons. Has been for ages. Ho hum, hey? Then why the rages? Ah, but you only hate what’s going on in the world because it interferes with your indifference. 1 understand. With you, love is a benevolent indolence. Your professor, however—your pompous, overbearing, scornful, behind-the-times professor—has not had an indifferent moment in his life. You shake fistfuls of noise and run about in the street, carrying signs like peddlers; you burn down a shanty and call it rebellion; you parade and call it protest; you go grimace to grimace with the pigs and celebrate your confrontation; but I—who fought in the Good War, who had my heave on Kristallnacht—I look at you sitting in front of me and I see secretaries and office boys: post-Bomb pre-Boom babies. You should have those initials blazoned on your banners: pBpB. Perhaps I shall design one for you. Then if I can find a compliant Betsy you’ll be in business. That’s where you want to be, honestly, isn’t it? At IBM. At AT&T. Have you burned a single Reichstag? smashed a single pane of glass? betrayed a friend for the cause? beaten someone bloody or broken up a rally? Burn books. Bone up on bricks and stones. For the future, you lack every preparation. You say you oppose the military-industrial complex, and yet you haven’t tipped over one lonely phone booth. Do you realize what the Age of the Mass Man means? Mass man means mass management. Are you ready for that? For Fuhrership by committee. The collective, comrade, means we shall crap in concert and spread the music on our fields. On your banners, because of the way they’ll look when they waffle in the wind, I think you need your B’s to be a little ragged. Or pointed perhaps like pennants.
   Mass man means mass murder. Put that on your Boom-Baby-Bunting. MASS MAN MEANS MASS MURDER. Can that qualify as a slobweb? Could be a Culpagram. But probably it’s only a slowcon. Holocaust, Hiroshima: warm-up tosses in the bullpen, dearies. 1 should try to find out the name of the young woman with the inviting thighs. She’s been sitting too long with her mini around her maxi for that show to be accidental. Maybe she wants me to get up to something? The true enemy of— What should the colors of the banners be? Underwear white? panty pink?
   We need to establish a condom samtaire, Culp says. There is no penalty for pinching back the future. What is the German word for "never-being-there”? That human life is of infinite worth, ought never to be wasted or taken, but always revered, is now a wardrobe too expensive to dry-clean. Who is not a member of the mass, you ask. Though not a hand went up, 1 answer anyway: those who detach themselves from it as a piece of potter’s clay is taken from the ground; those who seek freedom and individuality, who refuse to believe en
hloc or act on cue, who reject regimentation, decline membership in the order or the dub, live alone and don’t cooperate, throw their trash under the house, let dishes pile up in the sink, sleep in cats' stink. A man’s solemn duty, now, is to cast his seed upon the ground. Where it will poison the soil like salt. Nature’s way of safely decreasing the population is to increase the numbers of queers, queers of all kinds: bachelors, old maids, monks, masturbators, hutches, buggerers, suck-offs, idiosyncrats. We are even subdividing Hades. Busloads of Japanese tourists picnic in the pit. The steaming lakes are much admired, although the prohibition of photography is not understood and consequently resented. Anvils arrive with comforting irregularity, occasionally striking a bus which then explodes its people like pus from a boil. Each person bursts in turn and cameras fly out of the nose and eyes. The cameras disintegrate in motions apparently slowed. Lengths of film unfurl like narrow flags. Images, such as those which infect the mind's eye, leap from the flaming spools while uttering gray outcries and other prognostications. THE END OF THE WORLD IS AT HAND Students sigh in their snoozes, while 1 rhythmically slap my right palm on the podium, alert to sidestep a skirt slide. Her name will turn up on a class list: Carol Adam Spindley. I wonder how many male members in my class are erect, not many 1 suspect, except for a few boners due only to boredom—I’ve known those—the blood falls asleep in the prick.
    All right. All right. But the orchestra, as Culp says, is in the pit. Susu is in the pit. She wears a slit-length dress the color of Carol’s carpet. Sing, Susu. Sing. She sings:
               I love
               the arm of my man a round me, a bove
               the arm of my man my heart is poun ding
                                  THE QUARREL
   Every war has its distant causes and conditions. We’ve gone over that. It is absolutely necessary that these factors remain hidden and continue undisturbed, because, if they are once dragged into the light and confronted, their nature realized, all restraints will be snapped, all principles forsworn. Neither unconditional surrender, total war, nor Blitzkrieg will do—none of that kindergarten temporizing—only extirpation, only utter cancellation, the Carthaginian solution: the blot that blots out its blotting. We’ve gone over that. Never look beneath the surface of life, because beneath the surface of life you will
not find neat schools of gently swimming fish, seaweed swaying, as Culp claims, to water music, or even cicadas somewhere in their seven-year sleep, or moles stubbornly contriving their succulent runnels; beneath the surface of life is the pit, the abyss, the awful truth, a truth that cannot be lived with, that cannot be abided: human worthlessness, our worthlessness, yours and mine. So what the hell. The anvils do not burst when they hit as the buses do when hit by the anvils. The anvils plunge out of sight in the soft earth the lakes also lie on. earth made of muscle, callused skin, and organ flesh—boneless as some hams. The pit is a grave made of man. The fires feed on his subcutaneous fat. So a background complaint must be readied, you see, some grievance which will be brought forward eventually—during the terminal dillydallying which makes up the fight—as the real, the finally honest, reason for the quarrel. This surrogate must be substantial; it must be persuasive; but it must be a bright red herring as well. 1 have lost a Roman numeral somewhere. V for the vee between . . . What sort of name is Carol Adam Spindley? Next a signal must be sent—dit dit dit dah—which will alert one’s fellow quarrelee, if only at some subliminal level, to the fact that the weather will soon be foul, that their companion is not as sweetly companionable as she or he seems, so that, in the secrecy of still another self, the soul may begin to arm.
               I love
               the mouth of my man up on me a bove
               the mouth of my man my heart is poun ding
The next factor we are obliged to list (although we must awkwardly approach the bottom of the board) is the customarily trivial, deviously displaced, igniting cause: some little stupidity which sets the explosion off and which puts its instigator immediately in a childish light and sounds the tantrum’s tone. Our provocateur realizes, at the very moment of commitment, that he or she has poured wrath into the wrong cup, gone off prematurely, put climax before penetration, and this mistake increases the general grievance both parties feel-— one senselessly put upon, the other shamed. Although quarrels regularly get off on the wrong foot, that foot is nevertheless in the right shoe—for there is always a connection—hidden perhaps, yet altogether essential—between the surrogate and the source, first of all, and then again between the detonator and the nature of its demolition. Every quarrel requires at least the tacit complicity of the quarrelers, for nothing ends a quarrel sooner than surrender. When-
ever there is direct retaliation for some real and mutually recognized wrong, there is no quarrel either.
   Gray even when he is not dressed in gray, Herschel goes dismayingly well with this gray day. Tuesdays are terrible because the mail is always skimpy— local leaflets, memos, drugstore coupons, bills arriving as if set adrift in the gutter across the street—yet, in spite of the carrier’s lighter load, late. Late. And this afternoon the overcast is like dust; it is as if the entire earth were descending into my tunnel, filling it to overflowing. As if: for the hole I’ve dug is scarcely bigger than a basin. But a beginning, didn’t 1 say? a beginning to my inscape. Then why is my heart no longer light? because two days have passed and it is still Tuesday? because the legs of my love sur round me so my heart is poun ding? Surely I’ve not gone on mooning the loss of Lou? No-o-oh. My relationship with Culp is almost wholly one of tiresome repartee, but I customarily try to talk some sense into dear gray Henry Herschel; and it’s not because ideas slide right off him that 1 fail, although he is all slope. No. Ideas stick to Herschel like snot. He is a little dog-jowled, a bit pigeon-breasted, a little likewise-toed. With clothes, he cannot be fitted. His head is so much bigger than the rest of him, it appears to float above his neck like a balloon on a stick; and his round eyes watch your every move, open as an owl’s are sometimes; and he likes to bring them up close to you, as if, by peeking through yours, he’d see a secret; however, his frame shrinks from anything physical, from contact that near and neighborly; his feet stand their small ground stubbornly; so Herschel leans toward you like a rake against a tree, and since he is of only average height, his eyes, so close and large, need to tilt up slightly, toward yours, to which they seem drawn then like leaves to light.
   I remember only one other head like his. It belonged to the superintendent of schools in my hometown—was Trifocal his name?—he had diabetes?— what sort of name is Carol Adam whatever?—a big man, though, unlike Herschel, who is a water tank on top of two sticks. Tri-tif-tiffany? Trivogal moved like molasses, and his lids seemed always about to close. A huge round head— not a bit of pudge upon it—and it was that large slow figure my mother kept expecting me to return in triumph to replace. Tribunal? He had a habit of falling asleep in public, at meetings, banquets, plays. The scandal was sustained by his lorislike look. Herschel has a similarly heavy head, large lids, but his eyes are wide and wondering. If his feet would bring his body closer, he could pour that full wet gaze of his like syrup down upon my neck and nose.
   I’ve had to hunt up Herschel in order to head off this little burgeoning conspiracy concerning my pet dunce, Lacelli. Lacelli the belli. The most warlike small man since my father and Jimmy Cagney slapped that movie dame. A true punk. With a grapefruit, was it? A true punk. But my own: my own slow glow-
ing coal, my personal thread of smoke. To hang a fuse from. And Herschel always stands up to greet me, shakes my hand as if we had not seen one another since the beginning of summer, waves me to the one seat available as if 1 might be really wondering where to put my ass, smiles a smile of honest pleasure at my actually entering his office instead, as it usually happens, of Herschel having to float like a fog by mine, drifting in through an incautiously open door with nothing immediate on his mind, nothing specific to say, just gathering near me to mood up my life, cloud my day, waiting for me to open my mouth so he can rain down reservations. Hello, Hershey. Howzit?
   It is impossible—not to say, nettlesome—to carry on a debate with Herschel because he is invariably prepared to grant you your point . . . after he has blunted it. He is quick to applaud your overall attitude (for the most part, of course) (on the whole) (by and large) (in the main). Meanwhile, he has so effectively clouded the countryside that you can never perceive the defining edge of anything, or circumscribe an ordinary outline in order to locate its elbows or touch its tits. Blur, fuzz, smear: that’s what he does—his specialty. It’s not that, like Governali, he hates distinctions, but rather that he makes too many, and lays them down on top of one another repeatedly like an angry scratch-out of lines. On the other hand, you can never come to an accord, either—sing harmony. Not with Good King Qualification, Handsome Prince Perhaps. Not with Mister Maybe. Not with Kid Yes-But. Not with every idea developed as an endless polyhedron. No, you cannot quarrel with Herschel, yet the Hedgehog lets nothing pass. If thoughts wore ties, he'd always feel compelled, in his wifely way, to straighten them. So with Herschel one is habitually in a state of mitigated exasperation.
   Lacelli. The dolus belli. Deplorable twerp. Hard, shiny, well-shaped little tummy like an overturned metal mixing bowl. It shines through his shirts. A small smeary mustache, which he’s cut from photographs of his heroic mas-terposeur, struggles to survive on a pitted unarable lip. He frigs its greasy ends, but to no avail: they will not even form points, let alone stand stiff. He doesn’t dare do the D’Annunzio goatee. And I think he’s receding his hairline with a raspy eraser. I fancy he wears a blue cape borrowed from a nursey doll when he lays his Bonnie Barley on her ample back. Bonnie Barley: ex-sec, ex-stew, ex-wife of an account exec she met on a fit from Chi to LA, she is now a simple student of Italian disunion, especially, I believe, of the late Kingdom of Naples (that’s what she and Lacelli have in common besides their hard-core commonness); but it’s Lacelli’s strut that gets me; it’s his dimpled dandification I can’t abide; his come-and-get-it tough-guy hand-on-gun-butt stance, the stare he turns up and down rheostatieally behind a pair of imaginary airman’s goggles, his tramping about in tennis shoes as if he were wearing boots, dedi-
eating his unwritten books to Bonnie Barley as if she were Donna Anguissola Gravina Cruyllas di Ramacca, or some other similarly dubbed and bubbied Sicilian slut. As Culp says, she’s a soft tush. Hi Hersch. What say?
                                     THE QUARREL
   The quarrel not only has definite operating elements, which l have written on the blackboard with a squeaky chalk, it has several successive, almost necessary stages. During the first, the preparatory signal is sent, or rather, a number of signals are sent and received. These are like subliminal warnings. Above the restless and barren flood of normal life, as it were, in place of the peaceful dove-—the leaf-laden harbinger of land—hawks with pieces of bone in their beaks are sighted. We got plenty of such signals from the Japanese, but we suppressed them because we knew we needed to be surprised. Most of the time one party is first to alert the other, but, when the quarrel finally breaks out, accusations will be rapidly bandied: Well, you started it.
   I started it! You started it! You are the one who—
   Jesus. I don’t believe it. You can stand there and lie like that—
   As if you’ve forgotten already—
   When?
   Just now! Jesus!
   Some of this righteous amazement will be genuine, because the messages may have been transmitted hours before, and their significance, scarcely conscious even then, since suppressed; hence the startled outrage with which the commencement of hostilities is customarily greeted. Among couples, and even countries, one is usually the aggressor while the other invites the aggression. These roles are conveniently forgotten each time. Everyone pretends not to know their part, or the title of the play. So the second phase, as I’ve said, consists of a quarrel about who it was who started the quarrel. It is a kind of warmup quarrel and sets the initial agenda. Of course, the idea is to fix the blame for everything upon the person who broke the peace, and not upon the factors and forces responsible for the massive hidden grievances whose bumbling collision is being so rambunctiously but deceptively registered. Nor, at this point, will any acceptable or plausible substitute cause for the quarrel be advanced— tramps passing their shapes safely through hooked screens—since the substitute cause must appear to be lying under—not over—circumstances, otherwise it cannot be "discovered," “revealed,” or “admitted.”
   The day my father discovered that my mother was offering strong drink to vagrants, there was a terrible quarrel—one of the worst in my memory—my father’s voice low and choked with words as if they were debris obstructing a flood, my mother pale and pouty, eyes slowly filling with tears like a leaking boat, silence her only defense, except when, with a desperate giggle and a de-
Rant flip of her head, she tossed back the jigger of gin which still stood on the kitchen counter—that glass his finger had been firing his feelings at; so he subsequently forced her, in place of her own dinner, to sit on the back stoop and eat the meal she had prepared for the tramp. Most times 1 think the kid, here, is the shiftless layabout, he told her in tones as measured as powder for a bomb, but you are the real beggar, the real bum, the total good-for-nothing in this house. On the back step, beside a spoon at rest in a wide red bowl, she sat for an hour in the evening light like a heap of thrown clothes.
                                      THE QUARREL
   The third stage might be called the quarrel proper, although quarrels are by nature repetitive and recursive: early injuries are reinflicted, earlier remarks are returned to center stage, bite after bite is taken from the same piece of already rent flesh. How protracted any quarrel is—whether it becomes physically violent or remains at the level of verbal abuse, whether it is carried on in calm cold tones, in a condition of feigned indifference, or by means of screams and shouts and slams—depends on the stamina, style, sex, and personality of the combatants; but most of all upon the extent of its motivating distress, the depth of the anger that lies hidden beneath the battle like oil deep in the earth. Temporary truces may be made, and a lull fall upon the field, but no quarrel concludes until it is clear that the quarrel will be remembered more vividly than its causes, until words have been spoken, blows struck, truths revealed, feelings exposed, dishes or furniture broken, which add fresh injuries to the old store. The satisfied quarrelers return to a pallid state of peace with new enormities to fasten onto history—the attack on Pearl Harbor, the destruction of Hiroshima—as the fruits of their conflict.
   Physical violence is said to be the preferred recourse of the male; taunting and recrimination are supposed to be the favorites of the female. In fact, women like to slap, men to tease and otherwise provoke; however, women have managed to persuade the world that beating them is the crudest kind of quarrelsome exercise, as if bodily injuries were the worst sort. My father never laid a hand on me. Had he, 1 would have felt vindicated, and hated him then for good and wholesomely acceptable reasons. Instead, he belittled me, cut me down to size, broke my ego’s every bone, blackened my capital I, and left me less visibly scarred than did my adolescent acne.
   I guess I should add enormities to my list of elements in a quarrel. (I said elements. Elements are not the same as stages. Will you ever get anything straight?) Weil, there are always enormities. My mother didn’t say "down the hatch" when she put away the gin, which would have been an enormity in itself, but drinking the liquor was enormity enough. Enormities are notoriously relative. In the midst of the Holocaust, the murder of a few more Jews is not
an enormity. G & / leaves such patterns in a too abbreviated or buried state perhaps. G & /. Not R & R. G & I. Dear me. My book, das Meisterstiicke. The object of my former life was to write it, and there it sits at my left hand like an empty glass. Yes, there it rests—so near—yet I only dimly remember the text and its roll call of crimes, its sordid revelations, real villains, victims, vindications. I remember better mother’s sodden body on the back step. 1 imagine better Bonnie Barley rewarding that sneak, Lacelli, with the roly-poly of her boobs, the soft pillow of her belly. 1 did tush her tuft once, in a dry dream. Never ruffled Ruth's ruff either. Never got below the waist. Lousy Catholic upbringing. Some sort of dumb social rule she came across in high school. And I wanted my mother to stand up and come in through the door like a wind and toss off another gin. Through the screen, hooked from within, I saw her sitting, jelly bleeding from the sandwich on the white plate beside her. There are no miracles in history. Not in my autobio either. Nor in G & /. In the movies. In the funnies. These days to be innocent is the worst crime. Slobweb #9. And my white pile? It now serves to conceal these soiled and disgraced sheets, and grows without growing—spontaneously—like a turvy Topsy.
   Herschel, 1 think, is a kind of cruel copy editor, and I, alas, am often his hapless text. He replaces every ‘which’ with ‘that,’ and every ‘that’ with ‘which.’ He prefers commas to semicolons because commas are more noncommittal, comforting, egalitarian, and because he cannot be happy and still stay in harmony with the way 1 breathe. He faults my parallels. He snips off anything that dangles. He hates my elisions, my transpositions, my sloppy use of ‘you’ and ‘one.’ He invariably finds that my position hasn’t the preferred spelling. He l.c.’s my heavily Germanic Capitals, deletes my !'s, eliminates italics, prefers the peace of parens to my more aggressive brackets, disputes, every time, the way I break ideas into images, and dislikes single quotes. He says dots and dashes should be reserved exclusively for Morse. He always wants me to check my sources, moderate my intemperate verbs if not their Latinate length, avoid the first person, words in bad taste, the present tense, the subjunctive mood, and the passive voice. He covers the margins of my mind with niggling little queries. Which is to say, he is a thorough P in that p-art of the a;ss called Crack!
   One summer, on vacation, we were motoring through New England. It was midmorning. My mother suddenly caught sight of her left hand, ringless in her lap like a clutch of loose keys. I can still recall the indescribable soft sound she made. It wasn’t raining, but nothing else about the weather now occurs to me. Apparently she had left her wedding and engagement rings at the motel where we’d spent the previous night. My father took the loss of the rings hard. To share his sentiments, you did not have to have my father’s character or my symbolic cast of mind, since it also meant a return trip of sixty or more miles— unavoidable, of course, because the rings had to be retrieved. I was in the
backseat where ] could see the loss enter his spine like a stake. Maybe she had left them on the side of the sink. Perhaps they were still on the table by the bed. There would be no reason to have put them down in the outhouse someplace. It was likely, even now, that the shaving mirror was reflecting them. Every morning, when we had collected our things and loaded the car, my father would wipe the room with his eyes just to be sure nothing of value was left behind. Nevertheless, the rings had been overlooked. They were on the night-stand or the side of the sink, in the soap dish, on the glass shelf where the water glass stood. They were surely somewhere like that if the old crone who cleaned hadn't pocketed them for good. My mother wept. In his cold low constricted voice, my father berated her as though her sorrow did not exist. Images of the old crone crossed the windshield. My mother wasn't able to find a handkerchief in her purse and nobody helped her. All that aimless fumbling was just an additional annoyance. Her face seemed to slip down and drip from her chin. 1 was twelve, ten. Caught in the car like a fly in a bottle, my eyes flew against the windows. There, an image of the old crone appeared suddenly like the spatter of a bug. 1 did not think I could endure the return journey. And then, after all that, suppose the rings were not recovered? There would be no remedy. Suppose my mother had absentmindedly put them down in some odd un-rememberable place? Yet they had to be on the sill or the sink or between their bed’s folded-over sheets. My father was speeding now, of course, but he was too angry to curse, as was his custom, the traffic that impeded us. The honesty of the couple who seemed to own the tourist court was briefly debated. 1 said nothing. My heart was choking on its own blood. No one, least of all myself, wanted to be reminded of my existence. If we could remember the name of the tourist court, we might phone. It was too easy to say no on the phone, my father said. Confrontation was the only recourse. As if the world were at an end, the road rolled toward us. Our horn blew suddenly as if a tire had blown. Maybe the rings had somehow got mislaid in the luggage, I believe my mother finally suggested, and the car was roughly halted in a patch of buzzing grass while the trunk was opened and our baggage searched. Perhaps she had simply lost them in the trash and folds of her purse. After all, she was unable to locate a hankie. Perhaps they had fallen beneath a pillow. A passing truck shook the elevated trunk lid and light fluttered up from it as from a mirror. My father opened out a suitcase on the hood and began pawing through a stack of shirts. The old crone’s left cheek was puffed as though she had a chaw in it. That's where the rings are, 1 thought. Sure enough, in the top tray of the small trunk where my mother kept her cosmetics, the rings were found, looking less large at that moment, 1 think 1 felt, than I had somehow remembered them. I can recall her deflationary sigh then, too. It was not of relief but of another sort of despair. I stood by the road and watched my father watch my mother push
her rings back on her marriage finger. They never went on easily. It was not as if a fresh troth were being plighted. Except for an occasional sniffle from my mother, neither made a significant noise or said even a short word the rest of the day. She’s found the rings, I thought, so why are things worse? We hadn’t lost our home or a loved one—we had lost nothing, as it turned out—yet an enormity had occurred. 1 couldn’t understand it. 1 was ten, eleven, twelve. 1 did not know there was no loved one to be lost. My mother wouldn’t take her rings off after that and they became encrusted with flour, 1 thought, old soap, and dirt. Until her fingers became infected, and her whole hand burst: then the doctor removed them. They weren’t in the envelope of her belongings the hospital handed me after her death. We stayed in a cabin near a slipper-shaped lake that evening, and my mother and father walked arm-in-arm up the small rocky beach in the failing light. 1 shall never forget how grateful I was for the peace. It came as quietly as the darkness, and was complete.
   If 1 am truly a man of peace-—and I am such a man—then why am I always at war? The calm untroubled life seems a contradiction. Even when it's cold outside, I boil within. At first Martha hated our quarrels as much as I did, but now I think she rather enjoys them. They give us something to do together, something w! ich focuses our feelings. Perhaps matters will improve—now that I've begun to dig. A little manual labor for the mind. A little secrecy in the public realm. A little indicative mood and active voice.
   The fart misleads the nose, Henry, I should practice hollering at him. The scowl confuses the eye. The lion’s roar merely rattles the panes of the ear. Wars similarly leave not a false, but an enticing, trail—a ruin which represents another ruin, a ruin entirely intact, as buried in poisonous ash as Pompeii, as in dullness are dismayed the days of my life. Yes. To cover the pit: war, eloquence, art—each wears a domino designed to be more interesting than the face behind it. I shall tell him that. Once. Twice. Can you hold that in your helpful hand, Hershey? He flinches at the vulgar word—‘fart.’ FaDs! Fireworks on the Fourth. Hear them? Farting the heavens full. As if to take the stars apart. God’s tender bowels run out galaxies of gas. Ah, the clouds explode! O, the sky is rent! Here comes the flag floating down. (p)(Bjp)l® And the grand finale follows: what a rat-tat-tat! deaths by the baker’s dozens. Cloth, skin, hair, bowels. W®w! Bowels bursting in air! W@wl F®(rfhairtHlairtH3®dl®[rtt!l
   If that were the case, Herschel responds calmly, as if nothing had gone off (he’s not even twisting his hankie; he’s not even mopping his brow); if wars were like quarrels, he says, spooning a dubious tone over his words like sand on a sundae—that is, like quarrels as you describe them—then the usual values we give to referent and sign would be reversed, wouldn't they? and servants would be served by their masters. A small fan lifts the comers of a pair of papers as it oscillates. Herschel claims that air-conditioning gives him a sore throat. So he sits in a draft. You mentioned the scowl a moment ago, he says, his throat in good shape, but don’t we always read the face like a paper, interested only in the news? isn’t that what a face is for? doesn’t the scowl speak of an annoyance elsewhere in the inner city? give us a picture of the anger which shaped it? The fan’s breath licks me unpleasantly—like a lover 1 no longer like. 1 wave the air away with my hand but it is immediately back again. Wars though—well—he says—wars aren’t some posture put before the world, or an expression on the face of an irascible nation, to be read as we read the moon. To have sign and sense swap places so completely—isn’t that a mite radical, a mite strange, perverse even? (A mite?) Shouldn’t we look closely at such a dexterous exchange? (How dismally deferential Herschel is, how cautious, how picky, how mulish, how polite.) He, but not his body, looks me in the eye. I am curious about those flapping papers, weighted on one corner by—by a book by— I mean, he says, it's more than arguing that the occasion for the war or the bust-up or the quarrel—perhaps Culpy’s thermonuclear tiff—isn’t that his label?—well—the spark is often trivial and offset from its true cause—(Culpy’s label? is it a pickle jar, the jam we’re in?)—the way most genuine sparks are—(genuine? what would a counterfeit spark ignite? a counterfeit catastrophe? and Cul'py? my god!)—so that the true condition of affairs is somewhat hidden or disguised. (The true condition of affairs, he said; yes, what—what is the true condition of affairs?) Well, we both know how frequently that happens. (What happens?) I take a peek at the papers while Hershey puts a common kitchen match to his idea. However distantly ignited, though, he says, 1 suspect the quarrel feeds on its grievances like a flame, always moving toward fresh fuel, so that we see what it's eating, and everything is ash behind its path—(ashes, injuries, dust, debris, dismay, looks like a couple of office memos curling up in a flame)—whereas what you are suggesting, Her-schel says, ignoring, as if he were not privy to them, all the images of burning which I earlier applied to this particular problem, is that the entire conflict conceals its source by being so completely absorbing in itself, so devastating in terms of its own effects (isn’t that a fancy loop he’s written there, an £? Lacelli's name?
        that it earns our total attention. (Who calls Culp Culpy? no one I know, is there perhaps an unexplored area of intimacy . . . ? and then Lacelli’s name— all I can see—shit!) To a geologist, Herschel continues, while I melt in the heat and the fan laves my cheek and my suspicions mount; yes, Herschel, to a geolo-
gist? To a geologist a long thin lake may be a sign of some far-gone glacial activity, but never mind, because the geologist, along with the rest of us, likes to go boating; he gives up the sign for the swimming.
      SWIMMERS SHOULD WATCH OUT FOR FALLING ANVILS Men and women with their mouths agape, perhaps because they were fellators in a past life or because they just popped off too often, swim hungrily after schools of fish shaped from shit, while an orderly line of Japanese collects at the fire’s edge to await the moment when the lake will flush. The flames will form a violent swirl of the sort one sees in outer space, and then the configuration will seem to swallow itself, a great gurgle will go up, astonishing the tourists, some of whom will capture the outcry on tape (there being no prohibition of tape recorders, only of flashy cameras, as I’ve said, a rule much resented); then the lake, drawn into a spot of intense incandescence, will disappear like an ingot thrown in the sea, plunging the surrounding desert into a sooty darkness itself so indelible the Japanese will be dyed black as Nigerians—souvenir of the descent. Soon the pool will begin to glow again, as if spotlit, filling with foaming fire like a mug with beer, and the anvils will begin to splash in as always, with a comforting inconstancy and uneven aim. Isn’t that what you’re saying, Herschel says. (Another well-meant but unpleasant habit of Herschel’s is the way he takes up your ideas, identifies with them, expands upon them, develops their implications, drives them on like an old Ford so that soon they seem to have taken a 11-turn into another identity: not even the year or the make are the same.) (Foi^ny he should mention my lake—our lake—Lou’s and mine—especially since it has resumed for us its function as a sign and not as a place for bathing—but what made him think: long thin glacial lake just now?) $ith a memo maybe from the chairman on his desk, ^pemo which calls attempt to itself;—wdi| what is on
te other one? I couldpftnake it out, th||flapping $||o foolislw irreg^|r, %d the :at ij§so h$avy cigargjle smoke simplispills outjj|fthe ash liije a slow hose and heads for that coffee can he’s halved wi& sand aMpough urgidg my butt to follow. I mean, he says, suppose I didn’t vmft to plawSlnnis with you today, would I really break my racquet when gUmple fojpret wouldfsuffice? We never play tennis, Hershey. Neither of us pla\sa swat. Mil, perhap||^at’s not an attractive example, then—tennis. I’d lenjlyeu a racket; I have a sf^re. I can see his head bob about hunting for a mqp^attractive ftxample, so I Culp him off. Simple regrets, in the kinds of casesJFmean, well, l|ey never suffice. The question is: why don’t I want to play tenais with you todajl| Have I discovered you are screwing my wife? Herschel’s arms rise slowly as if they were being inflated by the fan. Look, I say, I don’t want to play tennis with you today, so I break my hand. You can’t lend me a spare hand, so I’m safe. Now, Hershey, who would suspect me of impotence, inertia, or high blood pressure? Herschel follows his gesture with an odd look. It disturbs him when I up the ante. The quail breaks its wing,
doesn’t it, I ask him with a sourness that comes from somewhere else, but I’ve used the wrong image—stupid—the heat has turned my head into a stove; besides, 1 must find out the subject of the second memo before it blows into the wastebasket; what about the book, too, what’s on the jacket? what the devil is he doing? putting his homemade urn on those memos, presumably to stop their flapping; that’s what I’m supposed to think, the fart, I’ll ash on the floor. Listen, I say, I don’t know what you’ve been told about Lacelli— The bird only pretends, Bill, Herschel says calmly, as if nothing has gone off, as if the terrible subject has never been broached. The fan wears a mask of mesh like a fencer, and turns its bland face here and there, its blown air gone almost at once without a trace, especially now his coffee can is squatting on those memos. Bye-bye is a gesture they can no longer make. Cheap brand. Drip. Suppose you were screwing my wife. His arms begin to balloon again, his body grows light. In that case, it’s not the tennis game I wish to avoid, it’s another sort of love, eh? it’s—I give him the A1 Jolson gesture, the “Mammy” singer bit that Culp taught me—it’s the whole loaf of life. Herschel is slow to recover from my dip. Sure, I’d pretend to break my hand, if I could get away with it. But there's more to fool than just you. When you got in bed with my wife (I continue to flatter him uncomfortably with the possibility), you rearranged the furniture in my house, the pencils on my desk, the clutch in the car, the stones in the garden, the way the world seems when I look out my attic window. And 1 don’t have to mow the lawn, now, do I?—with my hand in a cast—or shuffle cards, take tea, or play pat-a-cake. We fight wars to conceal a world—a whole world and its desperate condition—not one itty-bitty social gaffe or sneaky office memo. Wars and quarrels differ in scope— sure—in comprehensiveness, in destruction and general violence—of course—but the figure of the family is the model in the photo. With the quarrel, for instance, I might conceal a large lack of love with a little; I might moan about empty pockets when my wallet is flat and I’m also overdrawn at the bank So a slight slap might be my symbolic response to the fucking I think she’s had from another—a substitute for beating the happy pulch to a sorry pulp. Herschel flinches predictably—such a nice man—but it doesn't help me make out the name of his silly book. We hide bad blood with blood, Herschel, that’s the trouble. We gild ourselves with this other guilt so we shall seem innocent of some deeper, dearer, darker, crime—a crime we shall constantly repeat because it defines us—is us—is what we are. Wars disguise differences too great for a simple symbol to express. By hiding our basic urges, leanings, dispositions, sometimes inside their opposite like a tramp in a tux, we make them look—feel—sinful, as Freud saw, when, of course, they aren’t in the least. And the concrete corrupts; particular cases always make their general principles look ridiculous. Even the laws of nature have to express themselves in crudities and outrage, in bee stings and earthquakes. That fan there, for instance—there's not a thing it does that
doesn’t exemplify the highest and most important principles of physics; yet look at it: how does it distinguish and ennoble them? The quarrel suffers the same shortcomings. One of its functions is to disgrace the ideal. Then the farther the division goes—right through the apple from top to bottom—and the greater the distance between the two sides—as Adam eats one half, Eve the other—the more the matter becomes Manichean and metaphysical—Good against Evil, Greek versus Persian—the less interesting it is when put on public view; the sillier it looks clothed, out in the open, as if you were to advertise a crack as a canyon, and try to explain, in the middle of the laughter, that although it is small and not even interestingly irregular or indecently suggestive, it is nevertheless more serious than a break in some bell or a little hole in the Grand Coulee; it is a fracture in Reality itself. How do you persuade people of that, who prefer to stare at the crack of an ass or the slit of a whore? They may not even be halves of the same whole, you see, Herschel—it may be that bad. In a war, then, there is nothing to argue about: how can Body and Mind trade blows, for instance? Only, I should say, if they can find mercenaries to do the trading, and a common field for the fight. But the sword beats only upon the shield, and body thrusts itself only against another body, reason wrestles reasons not angels, feelings collide with feelings not cars, sensations interfere with other sensations—the spirit is as crazed as a plate—so that any passion which would cloud perception must find a percept willing to make itself a mist, and any part of Spirit that would trip the tongue or heat the heart will have to enlist an organ or a nerve to carry out its wishes. The Marxist believes that the mind is another organ of the body, whereas the Idealist believes the weapons fire the other way; but, in fact, the real catastrophe which their quarrel is designed to cover up is the irreconcilable divisions that cut us, not into pieces as a cake might be, but into heteronymous kinds. The One and the Many can occupy the same camp because every Many is made of Ones; but between Mind and Matter, and who knows how many other oppositions, there is no sweet little worm-shaped serpent—a pineal gland—there is no mark of recognition like a circumcision; there is only the abyss: the abyss, the pit with its lakes of fire, their shit-shaped fish, the Japanese tourists at the firewater’s edge, and the anvils coming down like hail, huge and heavy, sometimes striking the lake as luck would have it, or a tourist, or the top of a parked bus, bursting windows, blooming tulips of fire, exploding corpuscles of blood:
Mind must find, across the divide, a traitor to its kind. And vice versa.
   If the fan's oscillations are regular, the papers should flap in time, too, but they act the way the anvils do. And why is the smoke of my cigarette like thick gray pee, nowhere ruffled by moving air, or dissipated in some small degree? What is going on here? Shit. I'll just reach over his double row of dictionaries and pick the book up—what harm? Whatya into now, Hershey, I say. I see it’s not from the library, because it's wearing a dust jacket. Beneath the dust the letters read, D'Annunzio Abroad; a Bibliographical Essay. Geezee peezee. My enemies are collecting like clouds—softly, silently. How to dodge the anvils? I put the book down. 1 make no comment. I do not raise an eyebrow, though every hackle’s up. Ye gods of heaven, give me earth.
   My tunnel shall have a body made of simple soilage like the rest of us. Like the rest of us, it will have a spirit which is certainly no thing, too, for its hollow bore is no more palpable than spirit is, than consciousness, the ghost which Martha was just now when I conjured her, which I am when I conjure me, or Herschel, here, is when I conjure him. Yes. In that sense, it's as if I were making a creature down there in my dust, a creature out of pure crawl.
   Herschel isn't an imbecile. He catches my nifty allusion to Macbeth. But he just doesn’t know how to get the bail out of his glove, or where to throw it when he does. It happens all the time, Herschel. Sure, the disease—the inner illness—kills. Nevertheless, it’s the symptoms—right?—which disfigure, which denude, which scrofulate and scar and maim. It hurts, we say, but we don’t care a howl about it; we never cared about it before the pain came, only until the pain came, only because the pain came (perhaps that’s why we have to suffer now); and we don’t care about it today. We care about the presence of our lousy feeling. Period. We want it gone. Soonest. Make the pain go away, doc; rub the spots out; make the quarreling stop; let the war end. Peace is the death we rest in under that stone that says so. Herschel’s face undergoes an undesirable change. O, wait, now—much can be said for that, 1 say quickly, anticipating Herschel, heading him off again, peace is everybody’s favorite teddy, peace is splendiferous, and it's not simply the habit of the sandy-nosed. It’s the "get well'' word. But after all, Hersch, without a symptom, what do we see? without an outbreak of anger or impatience, what do we feel? without a heartwarming war, would we ever know or care or concern ourselves with what was wrong? The trouble is that the wrong we care for is soon the war itself, the family wrangle, the bellyache, the coated tongue, the blurry eyes, the fever—ah— the fever in the fevertube.
   The crime and its conditions, to be sure, Herschel begins, prevention or cure becomes the problem, of course—
   History is one damned anvil after another, Hershey. Duck!
   1 duck. I do duck. I dodge and weave. I snake my hips. But I get hit anyway: stomach cramp, smoker’s cough, Martha’s coldness, apoplectic rage. And by conspiracies, hostility, envy, incompetence, malice, jealousy, pettiness, meanness, shame, chagrin, spite. 1 am struck. Thonked. Repeatedly. By thoughts. Bumped. But not by Bonnie Barley’s Jell-O’y boobs. Her gentle belly. Her hidden thighs. Nevermore to do the downie. Zonked. By Lacelli bang between the eyes. By an old woman walking her dog. By an old woman out on dung duty. I come out of the cafe on the run. The sun is like a heavy rain. Suddenly I feel a leash across my legs and nearly take a tumble. My terrible day is continuing. The leash is a light chain interlaced with leather. Lou’s cab is drawing away. No. It is gone. The old lady says something tart. I lean across the leash and threaten to throttle her little dear dog. 1 force all my fingers fiercely together. She pulls back in dismay. The little dog barks once like a Pekingese. Once like a pug. I growl like a Kohler. Could you call this a quarrel? No skin off my teeth, 1 gesture in Italian. She lifts her poop scoop, shakes it at me. Get out of my neighborhood, you old tart, I tell her. She looks aghast. 1 confess to Culp that I’ve been having these terrible recurrent dreams—dreams about oblivion. Oh, Bosch, that’s nothing, he says. One thought distracts me from another. 1 open the fridge and wonder why. I turn on the tap and can only wet a finger. 1 take down a book to give it a blank stare. A feeling flickers. This thought—that thought—this notion—flits by like a swift in search of its swallow. Each lures me away from the others. They rush wildly about as if there were a frightened bunch of Bonnie Barleys fleeing from me in all directions like a bursting bag of white beans. O god. I can't go after all of them. Did you catch a glimpse of the ass on that one? Now why have I closed the curtains? Jewish Jell-O. Kosher cunt. Ah, friend, it’s one hell of a life! Could you call this scatter a meeting of minds, a convening of thoughts? This way to the gaz, Elli, Valli, and Ottla. Nice ass of the last. Don’t you like their vulnerability finally? Docile even unto. Dolci in addition. Dolci Clothes piled up neatly. Why not? This way. Now. Now. All out of favor am I.
   Sometimes 1 think, Herschel says to surprise me, you really don’t have any point of view.
   What? what? what’s that arrow a propos de? what? Is it like not having a sense of humor? A hurricane, hey Herschel? a hurricane has an eye, but does it have a point of view?
   Its eye is empty, I believe. Otherwise it’s all wind.
   Ah. Ah. Who is this? who is this I’m talking to? who is this who, who is so quick, like Culp, with the comeback? So is a whistle, I say, breaking wind. Hold that thought. Question, where did this tempest come from? Thigh. Thigh. Thigh. Think of it. Lou. Lou’s. Rue's I never reached. Susu’s I only saw. Through the slit of her skirt like a parted drape. Martha’s are now as flooded
as the Yangtze. Just one tiny tongue walk. Is that so much? Small stroll below. How little harm? No harm, no fault, right? Who? Oh, I’m reaching it, Her-schel, I’m getting there—to the point, 1 mean. I’m arriving after a long hot trip. I’ve been traveling along the Zuider Zee in search of the V in the V. But now let’s see—in what direction am 1 writing? west to east? Our problem is the problem of perception. We say, "I see,” as if we saw. Surfaces—that’s all sight sets its sights on—surfaces. We have this problem. The problem is that perception isn’t—it ain’t—it’s nuthin—is evanescent—farty as fireworks—that’s right. This way to the pouf plant. Stick it in my ear. Up your eye! Yet we have this problem, and the problem is that this insufferable zero—this zilch—has a damn strong odor like a drain’s; it has a tempting taste like a pie’s; it has Lou’s long slim soothing handhold—O—and its southern surfaces are sunny, its round combinations are seductive, but its heart is a hollow, a sounded gong. So long. Like war, perception is a form of distraction. We dodge one shell to be struck by another. Here comes a daisy. There’s an orange, a breeze, a whirl of wine. Anvils after all.
  Appalling piece of paper, Herschel says, pointing to one of the memos. Shameful suggestion, ugly allegation. What's going on? Here I am, an historian of my own evil, and I don’t know what’s going on. The rings my mother didn’t lose—remember?—the road which flew back like a cinder toward my eye, the alliterating light as it lifted from the lid of our car's trunk, my cowardly and constricted chest, and all the rest . . .
                                 THE QUARREL
and the anger, too, the escalation of antagonism and violence that’s so much a quality of the quarrel, my father hiding behind his hurt like a count in his castle: oh, all of it can be explained by means of the back door's screen—that image, yes—the beggar’s pale sincere face behind it, the pain in his supplicating eyes like something essential lost sight of, the flimflam, I mean, of every feeling, like that spoon leaning in her soup, cool, stiff, gleaming, sitting beside her as she was sitting, soft . . . the problem of perception . . . sitting soft as a spill . . . the composition compels you to look away . . . you proceed to the next day the way the next day will, inevitably . . .
  I’m tired. Hey. Suddenly I’m very tired. I’m not used to bending my body like a pretzel, or laboring in confinement of this kind, in air like wire wool, hacking my way back to my beginnings, as if, from this house, any road led anywhere. Today—no, yesterday—no, many days before, each day gray, each grim, I began to dig. No more hurray.
  Alice—to refuse all imitation, all literary allusion—did not have, like an animal, to excavate her hole. She only had to fall down hers; she only had to fall head over heels like a spindle of unwinding kite twine.
   Herschel has heavied me out. He refused to be real. Under the circumstances,
I am incapable of Lisztkrieg. What it will take. The anger can be explained.
                                     THE QUARREL
   One wants . . . O sure, one wants, but what? One wants as a wife a woman . . . what? One wants as a wife a woman who is . . . what? . . . malleable of mind, pliable in her passions, firm yet soft of spirit as one of her firm soft buttocks is firm yet soft. One wants . . . what? One wants a wife, a woman, who is not merely physically yielding, not simply a pretty and practiced piece of randy pulch, one easily puttied into pleasing, who will let you pee between her legs and aim the stream, but . . . what? . . . one who is naturally pleased to be pleased, and naturally pleased to be pleasing. How often the opposite everywhere. How always the opposite anytime. Every cunt closed like a Sunday shop. Yup. And then—how often have I wanted to shake Carl’s thoughts loose from the sullen web they were caught in, and tell him to be happy, dammit: you're a kid, you’re supposed to be carefree, so get going! And then—how often has the cat defied me—daily—-the damn beast. How often have 1 wanted to shout—to shout at Martha—to holler her heart out—when I see that slow set to her face, that frozen smart look in her eye, that morally superior wisegal smile—as if she were saying what I wish I were shouting: don’t you dare to feel what you are feeling; don’t you ever think that thought another time. 1 can slap her silly and not redden the side she has taken. To love is to trust another with your self-esteem. And then to see them measure you, to see the red line drop into the bulb at the bottom—my god, how you hate yourself, then, for the gift of your vanity, the care of your conceit! Think of it: you have given someone else the right to think ill of you.
   When the Germans went against the English, they went against the trustees of their taste and temperament In a way, they fought against the men they would have liked to be and pretended they were. Nertz, Culp says. Wars are fought for scalps and booty. Wars are fought with fists, knives, money, lies, and Sherman tanks. 1 don’t believe in your metaphysical imbruegelios. Well, Culp, you have no depths. True, he says, in the well I never hear the penny hit the water’s bottom.
                                    I once went to bed with a nun who said she was ready for some slap and some tickle, some kosher dill pickle, and some ass, if you’ll pardon the pun.
   Lou left me because 1 had, she said, a loathsome mind. And Martha’s contempt for that mind of mine (for 1 admit my mind is my mind) angers me out
of all equanimity. I think what bothers me most about you, Martha told me once with more than her customary heat, is that you’re not ashamed of what you are. What am I, for god’s sake, some sideshow freak? an androgynous Andy and Annie? What have I done? put on a Brown Shirt? been a Boy Scout? I’m middle-aged, married, normally horny. I teach school with sufficient diligence to keep an enrollment. I practice a profession with sufficient skill to receive promotion. I’ve raised a couple of unexceptional kids who are now in unexceptional colleges doing quite unexceptional work. I live in a house full of empty drawers and decaying mirrors. 1 am deeper in debt than my delights are worth and my purse can afford. 1 am overweight like my wife, who won’t give me any of my rightful nookie. So what’s so special? There is nothing genuinely German about me. I can confess to the merest middle-class crimes. 1 shall not become famous. I’m resigned to that now. No. 1 am perfectly ordinary. A humble burgher. O sweet humility, how it shames us, Martha exclaimed on the occasion of my submitted estimate. Do you really think you’re like everybody else, Martha went on, scraping some carrots as if she were flaying my skin, what an insult to humanity! Marty, what bothers you— 1 don’t need to be told what bothers me; I know what bothers me. Marty, what bothers you about me is that I have access to the whole of myself, not just to this part or that; I have complete clearance; 1 can talk to all my selves on a relatively free and open basis. Well, that’s what I told her, and that’s what I believed. But now 1 haven’t got that confidence. Susu’s severed head suggests to me that I may not have spoken to all of them.
   Tired. Suddenly quite tired. I’m not used to this. And I haven’t the right tools. I cut a smile into the ground with only half a spade. 1 have this little hesitation even as I do: shouldn’t I fashion my own earth’s ax the way it has always been done in the past? from the age of stone on? my knife and fork and auger, my counterfeit credentials, my maps? yes, and my Luftwaffe uniform? out of potato and sugar sacks, candle wax and food tins? But I’ve no comrades, no warning net or lookouts, no disposal team, no captured engravers or former tailors, no gifted scavengers and thieves, no packages from far away with cigarettes or other rations. The work is hard, hot; I’m fat, old, out of shape. So 1 shall have to get a set at Sears: shovels, picks, hoes, blades, bits, drill. I might as well make digging this tunnel as easy as possible. A trouble-light, long cord, some surgical masks, a pair of goggles, overalls. What else? Rope. Things will come up. Unexpecteds. Can I buy bed boards? Martha has those evening meetings at the Historical Museum. I can do the noisier work then. I have to be terribly careful about cave-ins. Caution for all 360°, for the twenty-four, not just nine to five. Too early to worry about the air supply. A good flashlight in addition. Even careful plans will go awry. Have to count on that and cultivate na-
ture’s patience. The imagination may be maimed at any minute. Yes. A long labor. But even by cups of dust were the Great Plains filled. Someday, instead of feeling as down as 1 do now, I shall want to commemorate with plaque or song or some suitable ceremonial the day I began to dig.
MAD MEG Tabor entered through a small door just to the right
                          and to the rear of the podium, and though the door wasn’t little really, it certainly appeared to be, with those massive pillars rising on either side, the dirty expanse of vaulted ceiling and the dim light which made the hall soar on and on, it seemed, quite endlessly, so that when Tabor emerged, it was a magical moment, as if a gnome had popped from a hollow tree.
   He would be carrying something: a loose sheaf of papers maybe, a pair of books, once a large, moon-faced alarm clock with Roman numerals and big black hands; and he always transported whatever it was so apologetically it seemed at first but a bundle, a “something” indeed, before it became a bunch of papers or a pair of books. These were immediately shelved out of sight in the podium upon whose slanted roof he would rest his elbows for a moment while he looked around the room, or rather while he turned his face like an actor in front of the camera, so that we might register its features.
   He never consulted those papers; he never opened his books to quote; and we waited in vain for the clock to come out of its hole and cast a significant shadow: to be held out to us to illustrate the cheesy commonplace character of Time, or to symbolize its cheap and easy manufacture, as if to say, "Time is a clown’s prop ”; but he didn’t make the least use of it; he didn’t refer to it in any way; nor did its alarm go off in the middle of his discourse as we half expected.
   1 have lived like a prisoner all my life, he said, and he carried his library around in his head as befits the prisoner. We waited sometimes while he searched, his eyes closed, for the right volume, the proper page. Then he would read to us the lines he wanted—word for word, he said with a smile, Wort fur Wort, but never, he said, his smile widening like a syrup spill, merely meaning for meaning, Sinn fur Sinn, he said. Nor could the scrumble of papers he carried have been of any use because he composed his lectures the way flies buzz—in the moment and out of instinct. As we listened we were watching their creation. That—their improvisation—was the lesson. Even at a party, Magus Tabor would catch hold of you and whisper, Listen. Lesson was always what he meant. The papers stashed, the clock hidden, his features displayed like a lure—like bait for our attention—he would begin.
   And you never knew what he might say.
   At the trials, more than once 1 passed a note along the table: ask him if he’s read Magus Tabor.
   Of course to have read Magus Tabor was not at all the same as having heard him whisper, Listen. To have read The Eternal Significance of the Caesar or If Then, What Now? or The Sense of Indignity in History was not the same as hearing him howl. When I knew him—first heard him—he had just completed The Death of Destiny and was working on what proved to be his final book, The Failure of the Future. I knew his written words as 1 knew few others, yet hearing him was not the same. The words which rose like steam from his mouth were not the same as the words which walked his pages, even if the words which walked his pages were walking to their grave. My father could compress his hate into a single look of the eye, and Mad Meg could express a thought in a gesture that would go off like a gun.
   What’s with the clock, Mullin wondered (or was it Teasor? some so-called fellow student, not likely Lam).
   You should know. You’re the native.
   He wanted us to think of Time the whole time (or was it Gleenal?), Sturm suggested.
   He wants us uneasy.
   I was uneasy, Lam said. The entire time.
   He intends to use his props. He really does. But he gets taken up in his own hullaballoon and never looks down.
   Hoist on his own prose . . .
   Mad Meg rose . . .
   And sailed out of sight on one of those painted clouds.
  Listen. We do things differently, Tabor told me. Now don’t protest, it’s true. You organize. It’s all new to you, you Yankees. You tabulate. You codify. Interpret. You explain. All this, in Germany, we take for granted—no nonsense, Kohler— we assume. History’s old hat to us. It’s new to you—as shiny as Uncle Sam’s chapeau. He gently pinched the tip of my tie, and I was no longer quite certain whether what he said wasn’t after all true. Instead we show the folks—hey?— what it is to have a feeling. Don’t you grasp the grades of difference? History must move—it must be moving! And his voice was like a release of steam. History—dear me, dear boy—is not a mode of knowing. Never was. To the ordinary German student, or to our Folk—our immortal German people—what—I give you the most hackneyed example—a blob of fisheggs on an egghalf—what is the betrayal, say—the stabbing—the murder—of Julius Caesar? Tabor sighed angrily and threw his arms away. A celebrated illustration. Think of it, Kohler.
A trite old story. A dreary anecdote dressed like a schoolboy for a play. Sick-en-ing: the Rubicon, the die is cast, the Ides of March, the proffered crown—portents, saws, and attitudes—sick-en-ing. In deep preoccupation, eh? he goes with haste to the Senate. There: a press of people, petitioners, another scroll. . . Yes, yes, but read it, Caesar! Oh, they are a joke, these gentlemen in sheets who stand about so awkwardly. Look at their hair: rows of uncomfortable knots, precisely arranged, laid out like cultivated fields, each curl a cabbage. Et tu, Brute, then. What divine conjecture! that’s poetry sanding history smooth! Imagine! Muffled in his cloak, wounds raining on him, rough Caesar speaks like Jesus. What a pallid picture book! such insipid English tea! It curdles—it sours—it quite unstomachs me. Why shouldn’t Brutus be among the mob who daggered him? Wasn't Brutus a student of philosophy and one who knew how beautifully to use sweet reason and religion—divinity, high principle—to be cruel? And as our student’s sleepy eyes depart these ghostly figures—can Cassius really know what he's doing, he stumbles so strangely—first the sandals are unthonged, the steps dissolve, then columns of the capitol are nibbled away, roofs crumble, vistas fill, streets cloud, and the whole city is swallowed in a fog of ignorance— there was never a sky—and this—this signal event (catching the sense of his own words, Mad Meg begins to burn like Clytemnestra’s beacon)—this eternal recurrence—this erasure and removal of greatness from the world—this, ah! murderous subtraction of the large by the small—is rewritten as a dream, an erotic comedy despite the knives: tangled bedclothes, cozy kisses, maiden blood, and all the manual enjoyments of cliches. Afterward: emptiness. After he bleeds. And before—what is there? Vacant time. No, Caesar, you were born with the blades in you. (Tabor is spitting.) Kohler!
                    Wieland said of Herder that he was like a great cloud changed with electricity.
   My image of Meg is made of fluids, heat, and pressure, instead. His hisses could cross a crowded room like those of a steam valve. I would take a cracker from a tray and turn to find him in among the many: gesticulating, calling out, going under. He came to parties to eat the canapes, and he ate them like a starling. After a series of rapid pecks, they would disappear like com from his hand. All the while he would utter his steamy cries, and dust any nearby sleeve with crumbs.
   Don’t run away, Kohler. Look to your friend—your friend, Kohler—Socrates— what’s he but just another tasteless curly-bearded Roman bust? Hemlock for him, eh? more white robes, a shrewish wife, and that’s enough. My god. Enough. What does it matter that he buggered little boys? Wasn’t he a vicious instrumentalist,
beggar-blind to poetry—to paint—to music, sculpture, and the virile mountain gods? Then that hate for mathematics, too; that hate for science. One of us, wasn’t he? True humanist. Ha. So city a man he seldom freed his feet to fee! the country. Yes. Fanatic. Lover of men. Lover of man. What does it matter now that he received from Athens honor to exceed most—and equal contumely: life, death, and immortality in perfect measure? It does not matter. To our glorious Folk—our diligent dull students—it must not matter. It’s terrifying to them. History—death— the past—any alteration—the sugar melting in the coffee spoon—is terrifying. But more terrifying to us, eh? We know how consequences carry on! We know we shall dissolve like sugar—all—and sweeten nothing. (Meg’s arms rise and fall like waves.) And what do your countrymen care about the Acts of Trade and Navigation? Marbury versus Madison? the Louisiana Purchase? Thomas Jefferson? Eli Whitney? Thomas Paine? Names, dates, documents . . . decisions and dependencies . . . deadly, aren’t they? (And Mad Meg roves the room like a fly.) Think of it, Kohler: AJ-ci-bi-a-des . . . the beautiful . . . now a name, merely a name. Imagine being awake in the world and having Alcibiades be but a name. It’s like sleeping on hot ash. So in any common German mouth are Barbarossa, Frederick, Bismarck—names. . . yes, if one is really famous, what’s it matter? you shall find your face upon a postage stamp! . . . but listen—only wait—be patient—just wait—tomorrow 1 shall show you what 1 mean. (And he went out in a tail of smoke like a snuffed candle or a peal of steam.)
   Well, Tabor kept his promise. The next morning he fairly flew—
                  I must try—really try—to be correct; yet what does it matter how or whether he got there? I could make it up neatly enough to satisfy myself, and even believe it. Why this concern with purely useless truths? How it was; how it seemed to me then; how I remember it now; what I prefer to think: suppose I could choose? which would it be? He trotted to his stand. Trotted? So he whinnied while he went? Jogged, perhaps. Yes. Jogged. But there was in addition the way his clothes fluttered— scarecrow in a wind. The paraplegic lurch he had. And the sudden wary pause, like a groundhog halting and sitting up to look around. A wounded
                 toy. As though, too, there was nothing in his shoes. Not jogged. No. That won’t do. Not for clothes in closets on the move—a draft within each sleeve.
He scarcely gave the hall another glance, as if he had assured himself of his security. After he had let us look at him for a moment—-bare of words—he began. There was red in his cheeks like the painted flush of artificial fruit. An actor— rouged. Who—who looks down upon us here, he shouted, pointing to a distant pillar. It is Bismarck—Bismarck in his casque of war! And the students yelled and stomped and banged their books together.
   By the way, Kohler, did you notice, Tabor asked me afterward, there’s no bust of Bismarck in that hall. He hugged himself as if cold and cackled harshly (it was a sound like frying metal), as he always did to signify an especially heartfelt pleasure. I also think he fancied himself in the role of a . . . witch. I caused that head to materialize, Kohler—that pillar, the crown for it, encasqued— think—imagine—the head of our great prince, Otto Eduard Leopold von Bismarck-Schonhausen, first chancellor of the German Empire. He spoke this last in quiet, very serious, solemnly lengthened tones, and I realized that I, though a foreigner (my god, 1 was born in Iowa), was being filled against my will (wasn’t I?) with the hot blood of the new Reich.
   The conspirators are sixty, Caesar; they will close around you like a dial, and stab the sun.
                                         absurd
                                      I cannot sleep
                             I move a little dirt out, cup by cup 1 fail to understand
   I wished to raise my bock above me like an arch, but what's triumphal in a cock-a-hoop? The curve will creep beneath me, never soar above me. So the hawk is swallowed sometimes, myths say, by the snake it’s caught. Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany. How’s that for a title? Does it have the right ring? Oh yes, they will—they’ll hate me. Some French reviewer will thrust his nose through my chest again.
                  Professor Kohler, if he were a Christian, might have said: there, but for the grace of God, go I. He’s not a Christian—every page proclaims that—and so his declaration’s shorter: there go I, he simply says. Then I’ll forgive him no more than I will the Nazis. What insuffer-
                able presumption—forgive them, he begs, for I am just as much a criminal as they were! (Something he’s gone a good way to prove by writing this book.) In sum: forgive me. He means—more modestly, it might at first appear—that there we go. Well, do we? If so, I forgive no one, no one—certainly not myself—not anyone. Only God has the goodness or capacity, the infinite mercy and foolishness, necessary to forgive such sins. But what intolerable effrontery: to ask us to take Herr Kohler—this lone Germanized American—as a satisfactory sample of mankind! Thank heaven he’s not a Jew in addition. That would be too much.
Our Guilt and Innocence Regarding Hitler’s Germany. It should sell. And what will they say this time? how will they rage? Oh, yes—they—they’ll misunderstand—deliberately—to have the vivifying pleasure of their hate. It can come, that fear, in the middle of anything—that dreadful Jew-fear now—with so much book inside me, so much myth gainsaid. 1 believed I could conduct my life like ... a bandleader. 1 had it all arranged. My god. Not that it matters what I once believed. Yes: like Duke Ellington, Harry James. I should hate to have my wife see this, so I shall slip it into my history where it shall cancel the ordered pages which shelter it like a spoonful of antacid. I've got to stop dreaming
                                     redreaming the past or my hands will grow over my eyes.
           The Sunday Drive
   This was years ago . . . Martha, the children, and I had driven into the country to collect weeds. At that time, Martha was in what I called her “pluck and pickle" phase, and she loved to gather great heaps of weeds each autumn to tie and hang head down in carefully sorted bunches in the basement. Placed in vases later, even the most unlikely plants displayed an intensely distilled yet vagrant beauty: dry pods like petals, petals like furled flags, the stiff twigs like an explosion of cracks in a wall. We would choose, when we could, one of those fine fall days when the sky is such a deep and cloudless blue it descends straight to earth like a curtain to the stage, and you can almost see the leaves beginning to turn, as if hastened by the light. We would take some baloney for the kids, some bread and cheese, and lunch among the leftovers, down old roads and unmowed berms, where life still went on randomly, out of the reach of sprays and scythes. The Cheshire would crumble on the bread, as suddenly
out of place as pollen in this world of the ripe expended seed. The cattails stood like daydream candy on a stick, and the fields were thick with brittle stems and cream and gray grasses resilient as wire. It was difficult, sometimes impossible, to make footway through them, and of course we wore long pants and sleeves to protect ourselves from burrs, insects, poison ivy, barbed wire, nervous bees.
   With my parents, during the Depression, I had prowled the country roads, too, with a cardboard carton in the backseat of the car to collect apples dusty from the tractors, their ripeness ready to be restored with a wipe like objects found in an attic. We also carried paper sacks for walnuts in their tough green hulls, as well as for the hazelnuts we would pick up in convenient groves and abandoned patches of trespass grass which experience had identified as likely locations, and greed had staked out as rightly our property the instant those branches incautiously overhanging the fence brightened with fruit. My father was devoted to "the Sunday drive”: late afternoon excursions to check on the progress of spring, the building of a road, the extent of flooding or wind damage, the color of the leaves across the state line in Pennsylvania; and so we knew the territory, and had driven cautiously down many a narrow, deeply rutted road past more than one neglected grove of russet pears or apple trees, by ditches which had disappeared beneath a flood of goldenrod, along lines of lark, blackbird, and swallow wires, beside fields whose fences were all broken and bent down in the embrace of bushes—flowered, fruitful, and blazing.
   I had a passion for buckeyes, which I would rub in my palms until they gleamed like bulbs—bulbs whose planting 1 could easily imagine would produce paneling for a men’s club, mahogany sideboards and dining tables, stately chairs—and their smooth, almost oily, glisten often distracted my eye from its pursuit of more useful things, annoying my father who always suspected me, anyway, of goofing off. The truth is that the apples we gathered were knobby and wormy, the nuts terribly difficult to break into, frequently infested as well, causing me to wonder how the bugs had got there, when it was so hard for me, unless they had been born in the stems that nourished the meat.
   My mother was mainly after elderberries, which grew along the fences and in almost any unploughed place, the blackly purple heads like a beaded dress. Snipping off the bursting umbrella-shaped crowns, we laid them on newspapers—whatever was handy—always carefully because the juice stained. I called the stuff "Lady Macbeth’s blood," my messed-up possessive slightly confusing the play's plot, but conveying the juice’s indelible character nevertheless. Small for my age, I often felt engulfed by the thick tall weeds and grasses; their perfume was like a fog—in such a cloud of scents I could not see—everywhere insects were rustling and clicking and stridulating, and when I reached up to hack
off the head of an elderberry, my face and neck would be brushed, as though there a bug crawled, while each hole in the ground beneath my feet was hidden in grass and leaves, where, in some, black water lay like a snake’s mouth.
   Wines, pies, jelly would result from our labors: stripping the berries off, sifting out the stems, cooking and crushing and straining the fruit; although 1 remember I thought ‘fruit’ was far too fine a name for such a nuisance, and 1 claimed the berries were poisonous: the juice would eat away your mouth and turn your eyes black. The pies were infinitely seedy and discolored the tongue and teeth; the jelly was worse than grape, wholly generic; the jars went on and on across the shelves (and if we had to eat our way systematically through them, I knew we should never get to the cherry flavors or the apple butter) until even the little cheese glasses we had collected were filled, sealed with wax, and neatly though unnecessarily labeled.
   In those days it was not enough for a product to be pleasant or nutritious, it had to be as useful as a jackknife in the hands of an Eagle Scout; consequently cheese spreads came in glasses equally excellent for breakfast juice, snack milk, homemade jellies, swallowing pills, and chasing whiskey. My favorite flavor was cheese n' bacon, 1 believe. The glasses were sometimes striped or polka-dotted, or decorated with red and white asterisks which stood out in front of the dark jelly like stars. What a universe, I thought, full of cranberry-clouded space and constellations designed to attract dimes.
   In this part of the country autumn is the only season one can celebrate; and it is not simply that the land becomes violet and mauve and pink and gold, as if sunsets were its new cash crop and sprang freely from the earth; or because the trees turn, overcoming the eye with color and the soul with misgivings; or that the pumpkins and gourds are gathered, potatoes forked into unrinsed heaps; or even because the densely enclosing stands of corn have been cut, unshuttering space along the roads like a sudden shout. These things count, of course, as does the limpid blue we’re drenched by. This blue is what ‘azure’ means to a French poet: a palpable infinity, something in front of which one puts a rapturous O, and after which a point of exclamation. This time of year rain falls through a dry sky, while in the summer the wet air wets it, so the raindrops come down coated like pellets of moist dust. Flamboyance and poetry aside, it’s how this season goes to its death that is finally entrancing, and one feels compelled to “get out in it,” as if the season were a process one could enter and exit like a dance going on on a dance floor.
   Provided the weather was fair, I planned to be impulsive and suggest an expedition. By keeping my counsel, and waiting until the last minute, I would avoid the anxious anticipations of the children, their possible disappointments, their inevitable nervous nagging. It had become more and more necessary, like
a state in tumultuous times, to keep control, to prevent outbreaks of opposition and squeals of protest. Fortunately, one can count on the calendar to play every tune in its time—the roll with its prefigured holes has simply to come round—and the right weekend did, almost at once. Sunday rose to the eye as blue as a burnt knife. Sighting the sky as if I were going to shoot it, I determined the precise degree of its fidelity: the true blue of its ulterior blueness, the whiteness of its inner wind. My verdict, which I handed down to a skeptical courtroom, was that it would remain fine. So we packed the picnic basket; put a ground cloth and blanket in the trunk of the car; collected two pairs of kitchen shears and one pair of tough garden clippers, lots of paper sacks; and threw in at the last a can of insect repellent beginning to rust around its rims, somewhat as I was. In the glove compartment of the Dodge, Martha stuffed a little illustrated book of ferns and flowers, crudely colored, as if there were only four hues, each harsh; and then we coasted backward out of the drive until the car’s engine caught, its starter being somewhat cantankerous. Carl cried out, “Here we come, critters,” and I engaged the gears.
   When 1 was a boy, my father never let me choose the moment or suggest the route, and I continue, like a czar, to be opposed to foolish freedoms; although as Sunday sank through the third hour of the afternoon I knew a drive was becoming more and more unlikely. I was grateful for the lapse in his habits— happy for this reprieved, hence precious, time—but the week seemed somehow unended then, as if it had dried to a pale paste like an overlooked spill of milk. At least the drive managed to put period to a week of otherwise merely days.
   I resented my father s princely habit. He couldn’t just take the Chevy out by himself; he had to have his entourage; he had to drive more than the car, yet 1 grew used to his ambitions; I became resigned, whereas my kids mostly hated our little outings, despite the fact that they happened only rarely and there was nothing routine about them. They appeared to be arbitrary disruptions of their plans, and because they occurred so infrequently, the children never got used to them, and were never resigned. There is no justice in any of this.
   Certain movements signaled the Sunday drive. It was never announced. It was never suggested. One was never asked. My aunt would begin to hunt for her coat, which took a long time. My mother would wonder if she should take her purse. My father would fish out his car keys and jingle them. I would usually drag my ass. Then my father would say, “I’ll back the car out.” 1 could read an article in Liberty magazine (reading time: eleven minutes) while they made their preparations and still manage to meet the car when my father backed it from the garage as slowly as slime. Culp’s snide spirit delights to tell me that my father was a creep in reverse. At any rate, his car was always in first-rate
shape, unlike the Dodge which was incompetent even as a lemon. It was, by Culp’s characterization, only a lime.
   Put in the car like teddies in the same carriage, we suffered, then, the same experiences, and so had something in common, as families are supposed to have; and we might have talked about them, these joint perceptions, like fans at the same game—-of Mr. Wendell washing his car in freezing weather until the hood shone like glass, of the tools we saw fall into the river while they were repairing the bridge on Highway 95, of the inordinate number of custard-yellow aspen leaves littering the road to Mineral Ridge, as if shortly before a king had passed or there had been a wedding, or of the vicious contest we witnessed between two gaily tailed kites—thereby, with our exchanges, forming a familial consciousness; but we generally didn’t talk, and didn’t join, and didn’t form. Our hearts were as bare and beatless as the teddies; our thoughts were elsewhere than the highway. 1 daydreamed down the avenues. I had taps on my shoes. I danced down a thousand marble stairs. I sang a lot of lowdowns, soured my mouth with Life Savers, and practiced my blues.
   No one ever asked where we were going on our Sunday drive. There was nowhere we were going, of course, so my father moseyed. He wandered. Like flowing water, he was infinitely circumspect. He strolled us along the roads as if the woods and meadows alongside were windows full of fascinating goods. I came to learn that there was nothing in his life my father enjoyed more than making these seemingly fortuitous loops. Yet there was always a point which, when we passed it, determined our return, and put us on the downward slope of our e as it sometimes was, or our /. We would arrive at the edge of a lake, or cross the campus of a small college, or crest a neighborly hill for a familiar view, and I would recognize these locations as the far end of our cast. Having caught the scene, he would then reel us in. I wonder now how he understood these quiet departures and unheralded returns; what led him to modulate his course, sometimes taking us so far afield we were threatened with the loss of the tonic. But I was frequently deceived; I did not have the local map in my head as he had, and we were often nearer the end of our one-hour odyssey than I thought. I didn’t try to outfigure my father, because he could sense when I was trying to anticipate our course, and then he would change it. For the most part, all of us were passive, peering through the windows of the car at gas stations and farm buildings, billboards and cows, the car appearing to roll along at the road’s request.
   At harvest time, however, we changed our characters like coats. It was the night of the red moon. We became predatory. We became primitive food-gatherers again. The bloody berry hunt was on.
   As a child 1 was more than once reminded that God had rested on the seventh day. Well, it wasn’t, I was sure, because He was tuckered out; and there
was certainly a lot left to do—damn near everything, if you asked me—rather 1 thought God understood—He respected—the weariness and boredom which had already befallen His created creatures, and which He could see come over them, unaccountably, like a cloud on a clear day; one that floated, that is, through the earth, and whose shadows arrived everywhere from underneath; thus—as if decreed—there were Sundays in store for us, and Sunday drives, and a scavenger’s eye out for the edible. Thirty years later—would it be?—Carl would sing hit songs in the backseat just as I had, only my father didn’t shush me, simply drove on, his then uncrippled hands a part of the wheel. Almost like weights of a clock, they directed the driving.
   To all ordinary eyes, the weeds in our yard are signs of our neglect, of our untended souls. Nearby, as though our turdy nature were a cause, vacant lots fill with weeds the way tin cans and wheel ruts flood with rain—with goldenrod and feverfew, plantain, pepper grass and fleabane. Rust, too, in the gutters and eaves, speaks our neglect, our impoverishment of spirit. Peeling paint quite as well. Broken glass. There was a lot of that: cracks closed with masking tape, holes stuffed with old clothes, panes replaced with cardboard. From a bleeding pipe orange ooze would follow a crevice in a board and down the side of someone’s heart. Neglect was necessary in those days. It was like a physical necessity, neglect was; it was a need. The farmer couldn’t afford to care about the trees he couldn’t spray, he could only feed his hogs the rotten nubs and wormy cores. And we were like his glut-loving, rude hogs too. Uninvited strays, we rooted even in the treetops. Not as useful as the wolves who weeded out the weak, we grabbed hard corn to grate into cakes, sidling down the stiffly military rows, cutting ourselves on the coarse leaves, stealing to keep our weaknesses alive. At least, as a kid, I felt that way about it. When another car would cloud the road while we were cutting or picking, 1 would grow hot with fear and shame. It would be the farmer himself coming to complain; it would be the sheriff with siren and six-gun; worse, it would be someone who knew what we were up to, if they didn’t know who we were.
   Unlike the stealing of apples from neighborhood trees, or grapes from nearby arbors, a bunch of rhubarb or a hard brown pear, robberies which small boys are almost expected to commit (I certainly was no exception), this pilfering was organized, approved, overseen, and executed by adults, those sources of righteousness, wisdom, and rule. What would it lead to? Why not sneak pies from cooling ledges, scoop cream from morning milk, entice green onions from garden rows?
   On the other hand, when Martha, the children, and I went out weeding later (though it’s years ago now), our values were—well—compared to that earlier time—as upside down as the weeds would soon be, their green life draining off
like blood from beef so their heads wouldn’t droop, their spirit evaporating in our basement. We wanted, we believed, what no one wanted. We paid scant attention to fallen fruit, nuts, bearing vines; our eyes sought not the moist but the dry: froth that burst from the pod of the milkweed, berries hard as marbles, thorny stiff twigs which would savagely shadow our white walls, loose sheaves of spumy wheatweed we hoped would bring a few relaxing lines to those rooms so solemnized by their massive regimental decor 1 sometimes felt like a petitioner, for Martha had begun to collect, even then, the heavy majestic furniture she would come to resemble.
   I call the stuff geegawdawful to tease her, but my hate for those massive Victorian wardrobes and settees, and the dark pools they make me wade through, is honest enough. Even when a little sunshine is allowed to pass her damn plum-colored drapes into the living room (or parlor, should 1 say), the shadows simply sharpen themselves, as if to dare me to enter them. 1 don't dare. To enter them. And the mirror that’s set back in that swollen oak sideboard of hers, behind columns pretending to belong to a Palladian porch: it reflects only haze and dustlight, discolorations which graze upon discoloration like herds; and, since the glass is too low except rarely to register a face (and only if a person were to reach for a teacup or one of the nested teaspoons), one’s hands and waist appear to be floating on a steaming and desolate lake of the sort found in Caspar David Friedrich: an abyss, a purple palm in a black cup.
   Martha is quiet, and the roads are so calm and empty we almost motor—as it was once called—we almost motor along. When we reach the river road, the Wabash will begin to loop in and out of the eye, the turgid brown stream papered now with the sycamore’s wide dry leaves. I slow down to my father's speed, to the days when thirty-five was still a brisk pace, but 1 sense in the kids some thrust in their limbs, some running alongside, and I realize, too, that Martha doesn’t enjoy having cars come so swiftly up behind us and horn their way around. I used to watch the shadow of the Chevrolet accompany us in the other lane, my flat black head framed in an oblong window which the bodies of passing automobiles would blot out and wheel over. A pickup truck rushes up, then bleeps by, so 1 sort of slip us off the road down a gravel track that only tractors take, sometimes with their low wagons in tow, and bump a bit from rut to rut until we reach a steep bank where the water stands below us so still and thick the leaves have to tell us it’s flowing. From the slope where I’ve cautiously parked the car in order to provide for a deadstick getaway, Carl has already picked up two stones and a short piece of branch and thrown them through the leaves into a water which rises sluggishly above the hit, a hole the leaves close; and his brother has had to be grabbed by the backside of his sweater as he staggers drunkenly along the bank. It seems to me I’m still pulling the key from the
ignition when Martha calls out to Carl, “Come!” and drags his brother back into the car by the scruff. There is an uninteresting patch of scurfy-leafed French grass, some winter grape, a briar, a bit of thug bush in my face. “Not here,” Martha says, so I release the brake.
   At least let Carl get in before we go.
   Carl can try getting in as quick as he got out.
   We stick these short words like tacks into one another.
   1 consider tossing Carl into the river where he’ll create a plop like a mushroom made of mud and disappear, the leaves quilting over him: nighty night. The engine of the old Dodge coughs, catches, the car bucks briefly as the gears go in, but we’re off. Martha frowns in lieu of a public statement. She’s sore because 1 haven’t had the battery replaced. Perhaps that’s what’s wrong: today the battery, yesterday the yard, tomorrow the gutters or the drains. Carl is testy because he’d counted on playing football with a friend, and had, in fact, his shoulder pads bra’d across his chest and had thrown himself like a model into a sexy pose when 1 snapped on my surprise like a morning light: Hey, it’s Sunday, 1 said; there’s sunshine; the sumacs have set fire to the woods—smell the smoke? the weeds are high and crawling with nasty bugs—awhisper with them like gossip passed along a pew—-how do you like that? yeah, the Sunday drive has arrived like an unexpected guest. Carl half suspects I’m punishing him for his little play with the pads. So we try a better spot farther on—no luck—the children complaining because they want to see a muskrat, play ball, and catch fish—all at once. Martha argues with them as if they really expected to see or do anything of the sort. She denies even our most fanciful wishes as if they were complaints about her food, her love, her motherhood. How dare you dream without my permission: that’s her attitude. We enjoy periods of being used to it.
   “You don’t want that," she likes to say, staring at the piece of pie we’ve chosen, while a white wad of Kleenex, no doubt the rejected wish itself, falls from her suddenly relaxed fist. “You can’t want to chew such goo,” she says, fishing a hunk of purple taffy from behind a cheek, wrapping it at once in tissue, flicking it out of existence with a swift wrist as if snapping something evil or ugly from her fingers. "You don't,” she says to Carl with conviction, "you don’t hate your brother; you love your brother,” she says, lightly slapping the face he’s made and gently shaking his shoulders. The kid is genuinely confused. He knows how he feels about his brother: he hates him; but mothers are mothers, and mother must be right. “We all love one another in this house, you hear me! my god, we sure do, it’s awful how much.” Her slaps are both admonitions and gestures of condolence. Brothers, after all, have been given by life many reasons for hating one another. Where, one wonders, are all those welcome causes for love?
   "Don’t slouch, dammit. Sit straight. Throw back your shoulders. You jumble your inner organs like apples in a sack when you sit like that. Breathe properly! In! Up! Escalate!" And her shoulders pull partly away from her body, the straps of her bra tighten, her breasts swell like inflating balloons. Perhaps that’s where Carl got his notion of how to play with the pads. “You adore carrots—since a baby! don't you remember? you used to chew the spoon.” The tines of the fork showing through the vegetable like a row of nails, a round is firmly thrust in the kid’s pinched-open mouth. And to me she used to say, “You can't like doing that,” in competing tones of scorn and incredulity, so that now my wishes no longer run downward in those directions.
   Soon the wrangling is intense, Martha is a sea in a cut-rate storm, winds whistling across her soul's mouth, angry with the children because she’s mad at me, the children willing to carry on the crabbing because neither of them wanted to come nor cares what happens now. I could let the car careen into the river, leaping out at the last minute, of course—Carl has shown me how— Geronimo!—momentum would carry the Dodge clear of the immediately muddy shore and drop it into the liquefied shit beyond. A splat would rise like a wild cry. Blessed momentum. I see our venerable vehicle upside down in the silt, sinking slowly out of sight, the wheels wobbling around as if all the shafts were broken: bye-bye.
   I can envision it so clearly because my mind’s been trained by the movies.
   Is that a fragment of white arm?
   I wonder how many men and women, kids and dogs, go through life in a state of modest misery; how much communal coldness there is, how much extinguished hope. Perhaps 1 should form a party for the disappointed people.
   If all had gone well (and all did not always), the ceremonial conclusion to the Sunday drive (the only part of it I liked and looked forward to) would begin when my father pulled up to one of Daisy's Dairy Stores for a cone. He knew what I wanted and waited for, eager as an itch for its scratch, so he liked to worry me, to play and delay, as Culp would say, toy and enjoy. Sometimes he would find one in a spot I hadn’t known about (he discovered them the way he discovered the road around Milton Dam, or routes through woods; the way he went up and down dells, found postcardy-pleasant points of view), for there were a great number of “outlets” (as it’s the fashion now to call them) in our area (the Daisy Chain, everyone said, an expression of derision 1 didn’t then understand); or he would drive determinedly by one of the stores to tease me— to tease and to please—only to turn toward another one suddenly, in a gravel of surprise. My father wandered—dillied, decoyed, and dallied—but he knew the roads as well as the Highway Patrol. The car would halt and, in the shudder of the stop, each of us would start searching for change; my aunt, if she
was along, digging futilely in her big black purse, as polished as a shoe, and puffing, as though it were heavy work. She always begs to be allowed to pay. Okay. Just don’t cackle on about it. But she pleads anyway. It's her treat, she insists. Finally one coin or other appears. If there isn’t enough, that’s all right, my mother says, I don’t feel famished. My father swears.
   At first 1 thought that Daisy was a girl, then a flower, finally a cow; but Daisy was only a name.
   The cones came in countless flavors, and the shape of the scoops were as conical as the cones. 1 liked the symmetry. They offered the tongue an uninterrupted lick along their sides and encouraged callow obscenities from the junior high school kids. Daisy’s remote management called the cones Dubble Dairy Delites for short, or Daisy Dairy’s Double-dip Delights, for long, and wrote the name, DeeDeeDeedeeDee, like a bird’s song, and then stood it erect to resemble the cream on a cone: . A list of the flavors, in appropriately col-
ored chalks, was posted behind the counter. The R in Rainbow, I remember, was written in peach, the 0 in grape, the w in butter pecan. At a nickel apiece, they were one of life’s great bargains.
   My parents, and my aunt if she had decided to obnoxious us with her presence, remained in the car. I’d take the money in my hand and crack the door a sly anticipatory crack. My mother would invariably choose chocolate, but she always chose last, no matter what, and my aunt could never make up her mind. Oh, I don’t know, she’d say, giggling a bit. I really shouldn’t have any.
   That’s right. You’ve got fatter than a stick.
   In our house my aunt made the fudge, the cocoa, the popcorn, the cutesy sugar cookies, the custards, and then she watched us eat whatever it was like a starving dog. After we had gone to bed, she would suck up what was left and hide the results in her hips. Oh well, it doesn’t matter really. Butter pecan, I guess.
   I want black walnut, my father said with a promptness that tried to pass itself off as decision.
   After my father had declared his choice, my mother would sigh. She knew her preference would provoke complaint. 1 assume that’s why she preferred it. Chocolate, I suppose.
   Chocolate? What a surprise! Hollow Santas are made of chocolate, you know. Nigger soldiers, too. Chocolate. Why don’t you take a chance, go crazy, pick something daring like strawberry or outrageous like vanilla?
   1 did once. I had a lime slush remember? I didn’t like it.
   Lime slush isn’t ice cream.
   It’s sherbet.
   It isn’t sherbet. It’s just slush. Slush isn’t sherbet.
   It was too watery and too tart.
   Well lime, for christ’s sake.
   Lime slush.
   Slush is supposed to be watery. That’s what slush is. It certainly isn't sherbet.
   It wasn’t a nice green. And there didn't seem to be that much of it.
   I’d stand in front of the long white counter where the glass curved back over the tubs of ice cream and study the excavations. Strawberry always had a deep, redly streaked hole in it, a sign that it was popular, I supposed, but it was a flavor 1 scorned, at least the way Daisy’s Dairies made it. It looked like wounded vanilla. Neapolitan was another kind 1 despised. Neapolitan was nuthin alongside the gaiety of Rainbow. Neapolitan was like eating a flag. The chocolates and the fudges made the best quarries. The ice cream spade would cut great cliffs in chocolate, make Maine coasts, shape desolate shores. My mother knew nothing of the qualities of chocolate in the tub. I would imagine myself a counterboy, and I would dream of the designs I would cut in the ice creams as I packed pints or scooped for cones. Later I'd decide that my mother chose chocolate because it contained a narcotic. Riling my father was a secondary benefit.
   Finally I’d be handed a clutch of cones and would carry them like a bouquet to the car. There I’d pass them carefully through the driver’s window a bloom at a time. Rainbow, my father would say. What a surprise! Rainbow again. Well, I’d sometimes say cheerfully, when I get to the end there’s a pot of gold. I’ve been there, and there’s a chamber pot at the end of the rainbow, my father said, precociously showing a streak of Culp. My mother moued, protesting the reference. Everyone’s mouth cooled. My father considered Rainbow nothing but a hash made of tub leavings; dinner’s garbage reboiled for breakfast, he said it was. But I loved its accidental and chaotic benevolence. It was like having a noise melt in your mouth. Grape eased into pineapple, then bent itself about banana. A nut would turn up.
   You’re licking leftovers.
   Rainbow was a letdown only when the scoop took up too much of the same flavor. What is a rainbow of one color? It’s mostly grape, alas—alack, it’s all lemon.
   Later I could have compared Rainbow to the stockpot at the back of the stove; 1 could have extolled leftovers, stews and hashes; but the youthful mind is a barren plain: there is no range of reference.
   Crows eat what nobody wants.
   I like Rainbow.
   Crows go for what’s run over on the road.
   Later I could have compared Rainbow to complicated batiks and tie-dyes, to color swirls, the northern lights. But then I could only confess to my wants. I often wanted to get my father’s goat, and 1 could have compared my cone to
the mixture of nations and races which composed our country. He’d have nan-nied at that all right.
   You don’t know what you want.
   We would try another place farther on-—no luck—so then 1 would veer away from the river, cross the main road and go up the ridge on the other side, passing people carrying dressed-up babies out of a country church. At this time of day, Martha wondered. The males made no remark. They had grown sullen. We sat in our silence as though in heavy coats. I watched for fragments of my children in the rearview mirror. Carl licked at a place where his nose had run. Carl’s brother untied his shoe. Martha gave it up. My aunt pretended not to want, my mother was afraid to want, I didn’t know my wants, and my father was sick of the lot of us. 1 should have remembered how hard it was to find a place to picnic on a trip, I thought, or a place to pee, a place to pick elderberries, or, as now, weeds. There would be poison ivy or fierce persistent bees, a stretch of soft yellow mud, a steep bank or some other kind of unpleasant footing, cow plop, brambles, burrs. It was easier to find a place to neck. 1 don’t want any of that cattle crap carried back to the car, my father would warn as we got out. I would have begun to clash the shears—a sound which seemed to annoy everyone. Maybe I’d see a snake. My mother would encounter something which would cause her to break out. My aunt would harvest fruits which were inedible and nuts nobody wanted. Once home, we’d agree: it’d been fun.
   1 had at last got us lost down a half-grassy track which kept wandering in and out of thin scrubby woods while following, 1 suppose, the path of least resistance, when we approached an artificial rise on which a spur of track had been mounted. Just over the hill ahead is heaven, 1 promised in the tones of a travelogue, but 1 couldn’t raise a scoff. I proceeded slowly. These roads are not kind to large cars. Once gingerly over the track bed, we saw the barns—a line of them—and an abandoned barnyard: an overgrown fence, broken gate, high grass, of course weeds. We are like lambs who have found our way, 1 falsetto'd to no applause. White, with red shingled roofs, the barns are beautiful. Even Martha looks pleased. 1 know better than to believe in looks, but she does look pleased. Four doors open simultaneously and we pile out. I am, however, not parked on a slope.
   I had a cousin Lois once. I may still have a cousin Lois for all I know. She was said to be my first love, but I learned very early that adults lie about every feeling, so I never put any faith in the claim. Growing up and covering up were secret synonyms with them. Anyway, Lois was visiting us from Iowa, and she went along on one of our elderberry expeditions. She was only ten and didn’t have to pick walnuts any longer than she wanted to—one privilege of a guest: to have one’s wants recognized—or wade through the high weeds to get at a few remote and knobby apple trees, or watch out for the occasional damn dog.
   We found ourselves that trip in the middle of a rather marshy meadow where a long warped board, gray as sea wrack, had apparently floated ashore, somewhat as we had; so while the rest of us gathered and rescued and thieved, Lois set out a row of mud pies decorated with flowers and grass and circlets of burrs, red berries for the centers of some, a yellow blossom or two, or red leaves braced with mud to make a bow. Little alyssum-like flowers covered one, I remember, like a nosegay poking out of a bride's fist. In the middle of a pie that might have been a cow's paddy, it was large enough, 1 noticed with disgust a pale emaciated pink worm she had rolled the way you’d roll a broken rubber band around a finger to create a satisfying whorl to place within the heart of her design. I stomped on several of her pies with a foot so fierce it set the board to shivering. The result was I carried gobs of mud mixed with tiny fruits and seeds back to the car on my shoes, the little shit screaming as if I’d pushed her down in a puddle. It was difficult for my aunt and my parents to make out what was the matter.
   Since Martha and the kids are happy clipping stalks and stems, I walk back to the rails for a better view of the barns. They appear to have been built of wood shingle, melancholy, and roofing tin. I could come upon them, from this vantage point, like Pizarro or Cortez upon the habitation of an ancient people. The barns are separated from the road by two isolated lines of track, by a drainage ditch which a crude little bridge skips, and by a clearing now crowded with vegetation: a tough-looking patch of thistles and then a silver-gray swatch of immeasurably delicate grass, and finally a lot of plants quite tall and imposing which I cannot identify. So the barns seem to rise out of a sea of fronds and pods and tiny leaves. There are three of them to the west, steaming beam to beam like ships, each gable ridge a prow, although they vary slightly in size and certainly in design. The one struck last by the sun when it sets is attended by three scaling gray silos. Wrapped in loops of fine wire, they rise beside it like the gigantic stumps of some prehistoric tree, and their shapes, as well as the patterns of the stains which have descended their sides, and the lines of the vines which have climbed them, delight the eye the way good monumental sculpture does—by the force of its immediate mass and the caress of its eventual texture. There they store all that darkness which a day like this has defeated, and retain it for release at another time.
   The middle barn is appropriately crowned by a four-square, double-shuttered cupola which holds into the wind the cutout metal figure of a circling hawk. It is a conceit I find in a farmer almost metaphysical. The eastern barn is slightly smaller, though more romantic, as if its lofts held wisps of nostalgia instead of the absent hay it has. Nearly circumscribed by a limping fence, the building’s large upper loading door arrows abruptly into its own angular eave.
while the barn's undeniably solid presence seems to be receding while I watch—into the past perhaps, into never-never land—as though there were, in its world, a vanishing point from which it might not choose or be able to return. Rimmed in red like tired eyes, the windows of all the buildings are watchful black voids. It’s as though the holes themselves were looking out. They seem symmetrically placed in the barn with the hovering hawk, and in the one by the silos as well, but they are irregularly set in the smaller structure, which also lets its west wall lean out beyond the high hip of its roof to create a creature of singularly gawky beauty. All three face a large tract of bottomland which the Wabash regularly floods and thereby feeds fresh mud. Their tin roofs, in the shape of a Dutch girl’s lacy cap, are what you see first, for they slope toward their own feet like local hills, and serve both as roof and wall for a while, their color a melted run of rust and pale blood the sun seems to have set in motion as though a clear stream were passing through the pigment.
   Although at home, they are lost, alone, alive. They send a shiver through me.
   I was humming hit tunes in the backseat and watching the roadside go by as dreamily as it was watching me when I heard from my father half an inarticulate outcry and my head was slammed into the watching window. Almost immediately all of me was jerked back as though Martha was yanking one of the kids from the edge of an embankment, only now I was to be thrown onto the pile of elderberries we had wrapped in funnels of newspaper or stuffed in grocery sacks. As I rebounded from the floor of the car my ears received, like the rapid rasp of a saw, a series of terrible sounds: of rending metals, shattering glass, pissing vapors, unstaged screams. Actually, hearing scarcely intervened. They were palpable things, these noises, there like the rear window, rear seat, scissors, bags of berries. Through that window, back on the highway we had so abruptly fled, I saw two automobiles still shuddering from the force of their collision. Gray white steam rose chaotically. Glass began to patter upon the roof of our Chevrolet where we were stopped upon the shoulder. Then, almost slowly, eight doors fell off or opened and people fell or otherwise came out of them, some hugging themselves and rolling over on the highway or down the bank beside it near where we were. A fragment of white arm appeared in the steam. 1 stared. Staring was all I was. How quickly—inexplicably—my peaceful window had been entered by this other. A woman asmear with blood stood up, fell softly down, stood slowly up again, wavering like a little flag. The car which had been in line behind us was new and shiny. I had noticed it because it had followed us awhile, unable to pass and impatient because of the traffic. The car which had struck it was a heap of rust, and now weakened fenders and body panels were broken and scattered. Both hoods had risen in the air to allow the engines to rush at one another. One man had hopped away from the wreck on his unshat-
tered leg and hugged a tree. Water appeared to be running down the leg of a lady who’d got no farther than the running board. The dust still rose in rivulets, making the air seem to shake as if it were a pane of glass in the process, like the sky, of coming to pieces. My god, we've got to get out of here, my father said. Then I also smelled the gasoline. People began to come from other cars with coats and their own anguish. They appeared to be oblivious of the gasoline. I didn’t utter a word—not one. What 1 saw entered me like a spear.
   Finally my father got slowly out of the car as though drugged and went passively as a thistle to where a man with one shoe lay in the road, and when there he covered him with an old shawl we sometimes carried walnuts in by pulling the four corners together in a tramp’s knot. Don’t look, Billy, don’t look, my mother said, sick in the front seat, and certainly not looking herself. I had both eyes out, as they say, on stems. I felt hot, yet I was without feeling, like a warm stone in a fire. Someone 1 couldn’t see was sobbing. Two well-dressed men arrived, looked anxiously around and talked. One pointed up the road and shook his head. Suddenly a dolled-up little boy appeared running toward the wreck, and the man who'd been pointing howled no-o-o-o-o and rushed toward him arms spread, as though to scoop him up, the way I always feared a bull might run at me in a meadow. My father stood in the road by the figure he had covered and looked down and didn’t do anything further except draw his foot away from a wet spot. 1 watched first the man up and then the man down until the police came in sirens like their Sunday best and eventually we were sent away. My mother said, Good grief, Billy, look at you. She had a hankie still pressed to her mouth. It wasn’t my bruise she meant. I was spotted with purple berry juice like someone afflicted with comics-page measles. We drove home slowly in a hush like held breath. We drove home without stopping for a cone. We reached home before my head began to hurt. By then I was ashamed to say anything, as if anything I’d say would sound like something made up. My father hung my mother’s coat in the closet. They sat together on the sofa then. We were silent all the way into supper, which my mother annoyed my father by not eating. She always prolonged pain when possible. She prolonged her death twenty years. In those days she had just begun to drink without appearing to do so, and had begun to seek excuses for her lack of appetite. This time she toughened my father’s very temporary tenderness. My father did say in wonderment at one point, I don’t know how I managed to get out of his way. My father was thinking about our near miss, my mother about the bloodshed. Being unharmed made my father hungry. What was wrong with the rest of us? When my bedtime came, they let me stay up to listen to the "Hit Parade.”
   Well, I was right, the wind is white. There is a slight sliver of ice in it, the last hint of coolness in a dying drink. A calm elation has come over me, and the
bams are the cause. I understand that much, although I am unable to explain why 1 am elated or why I am calm. Perhaps we aren’t in the ordinary world anymore and these are the barns of the three bears. 1 watch my wife and the children move about cutting and collecting. Carl is in a hurry as if someone else will get everywhere first. Martha is wearing, 1 notice, one of my old favorites— a granny dress she’s put on now because the dress is long and old and doesn’t matter. I liked it because it hid her fat. But she knew that. In a moment I shall leave this little rise and look for a place to set out lunch. A piece of Brie is melting on my tongue. What good has it done me to love olives? It would be wonderful if the rails were to tremble and hum and life come down them ahead of some train. The white shingles gleam in the sunlight, and the sky whistles its blue way everywhere, taking its tune to the deepest woods. “Red Sails in the Sunset”—wasn’t that one of the songs? Wait now. 1 am staring at the trunk of a sycamore and imagining 1 am peering out the window of a plane. The trunk is a river beneath the shadow of the wing, and the barky scales are islands. This river is wider than the Wabash and has many banks and bars. No. I was considering the symbolic character of leaf color: that’s where I was. O/iodi (D/cva. The sumacs soften, despite their intensity, and even the clear yellow of the mulberry leaves has a gray interior. Anyway, it’s not a palette which would appeal to Mondrian. Only in a painting or a poem can you find true purity . . . perhaps in a little song, a little Elizabethan lyric, possibly by Ben Jonson. Never in a man or woman. The colors of the ice cream called Rainbow didn’t really run together, even when you licked them; they didn’t blend but jostled one another like people with packages in a crowd. Yes, “Red Sails’’ might have been the song. When the ice cream had melted in my mouth, then the butter pecan might drown in banana and peach become walnut. No one was some one then. As for the barns, as for them: the contrast between sky, roof, and wall is pleasing indeed—pleasing—as if the lid of your eye were kissed—so is the difference between what is natural here, and what is manmade: the wheatweed stem, the shingle, a puddle, the rope’s end.
   While the barns have been neglected, they were obviously in wonderful condition once, and the vandals have somehow avoided them—‘spared’ is, I think, the wrong word. My father took persnickety care of his car, and even when he could no longer drive it, and it stood in the garage, he kept it shined like a gun in its case. Our near miss was for him the car’s close call as well. In the little bear’s barn I’ll discover later one rear window which has a triangular hole in it, and out of that hole will hang the frayed end of an old rope. When I cut into our bread’s crisp crust, tiny bits of it will fly about, and the softness of the sawing sound will be pleasing as a creek. I notice now that the silo'd barn has undoored openings, and that deep within the feed passage, near where I’ll find an ancient tractor parked, dangles a single bare and burning bulb, lit as if to say,
“I am alive,” so maybe the fallen condition of the fences—the unmowed yard and rampant weeds—is relatively recent. After lunch, beside an outbuilding of indeterminate function, I’ll encounter an old gas pump, its glass gone of course, the screw still up in the wire which once supported the bowl that held the fuel; and it will be dressed in rust like a fashionable statue of a pump, half a lifetime out of use. Another mark of man’s presence here, the pump has become a work of art, but not one of man s making unless neglect is liberating. Water stagnates in a wheel rut and weeds fill the clearing. When I slice the bread little bits of being fly up whenever 1 make a cut. Shall I cherish the occasion? When I slice the bread little bits of bread fly up, nothing better or beyond, just crumbs.
   Winter covered the Sunday drive with cold and snow, and there were no cones for a long time. There were quarrels about money and my aunt almost moved out, standing symbolically by the front door, holding her handbag as if it were her huff. They did the berries anyway, though some were squashed. They’ll all be squashed soon enough, I said. Consequently, a row of jelly glasses got marched across a storage shelf. 1 imagine our Dodge sailing over the edge of the bank through an opportune opening between hawthorn and hackberry— hurrah!—and spilling its contents under the mud. The doors will come slowly open and moles emerge in search of their runnels. These barns have been abandoned, but they have been abandoned to beauty. They are no longer bams. They are themselves. A leftover light is burning. The barns . . . they have been left alone to breathe. I see I am standing three times in three times—mine, theirs, the weeds—now. It is utterly awful and confusing and 1 don't mind. I am thinking about lunch and a mouthful of wine. Carl will not peel off the crusts of his baloney bread. Martha is waving, holding five feet of black mustard stalk above her head. I shall have the furniture carried out, heavy as it is, and the kids, light as they are. My life shall become barns. In one barn of me-— the blessed barn—lonely as a rented room—I shall keep one light lit. Sometimes I know what I want, but I’m not on that account allowed to have it. DeeDeeDeedeeDee. In an earlier season of our association, on a day and in a place like this, Martha and I would have made love. Sheltered one another like awnings. My seed won’t dry into anything a vase can celebrate. Our history is as leafless already as these trees will be, though one of them is wider than the Wabash. Still, all of this was years ago now; we are waging other wars; and now none of these conditions obtains.
   My eyes are ringed like stumped trees, but fifty years have not consumed the fat I laid up on my chest when I was young. My body still is hairless, baby smooth. How it shamed me, then, to undress in a locker room or linger suit-
less by the Y pool, kid among men. Now, when 1 could grow a beard, I’m brutal, and scrape close. 1 remember the moist tiles, the water heaving near my eyes because I dared not close them in that noose of naked bodies. In the army, too, they took our clothes and stood us up for hours in drafty lines like Jews or the newly received insane whose teeth they also took away—their jewelry and combs—and I survived by smothering every feeling in my chest, my rib cage closing like a pair of murderous hands upon my sense of shame. What a blessing water was, though I kept stoppered against the chlorine and without air in my lungs sank blindly to the bottom. Throughout a lifetime all my passions have been similarly driven in. I have had, when you consider it, a bottle-mad mother; a little Fuhrer’s been my father, and the house I knew my youth in was always dark, close, dirty, overcrowded, damp, and foul with sickness and women. Women and sickness had Tabor too—they crippled him—but such was his will he flew above his body like a kestrel.
             Mad Meg
   Tabor limped hurriedly through the door to the podium, pausing slightly to glare at us. Then he came down from the podium past the Schiller, the Herder, the Goethe pillar, stood a moment to stare out the narrow oblong window which framed the statue of Frederick in the square, and finally stumbled along the first open row of chairs, clutching wraiths like awkward bundles to his chest. Dulle Griet? Yes, you would have thought him mad; put a pot on his head. And that was plunder—brooches, earrings, bracelets, gold and silver boxes, candlesticks, the family plate—he held near his breast.
   Suddenly he stops. There is something confronting him; there is something in the air in front of him, invisible to us (and who are we? what can we see? born in Iowa, in present-tense America? what can any one of us [the whole of France, the whole of Germany] alongside Mad Meg see? for remember, he reminds us, Machiavelli believed in invisibles, swept spirits out of doorways with an elegant hand), and Tabor faces it. It? What would we historians say? (in all of Italy or England) that he was facing a fact? Ah, he exclaims, ah . . . There's amazement, too, in his voice, for a fact (as we know, we’ve been taught, are now to be taught again) is a permanent unlikelihood, a counterfeit miracle, a wonder which nature can never have honestly produced. A fact... He feels tenderness for it, wonder and tenderness, a wonder such as children have for butterflies and flowers, sweet bright fluttering evanescent things; but can this fact, this marvel,
truly be? FACT? the noise of the word bursts from him. What is a fact, he roars; and of course we cannot answer him; we dare not answer him.
                   It’s one of those black tales which students tell when bladdered with beer—that once when Mad Meg asked he was answered; that once a cadaverous tall man in a red shirt unaccountably rose from the front row and replied [something curt, of course, and probably incendiary, though neither the question nor its answer is a part of the story]; and after a moment of shocked, unbelieving silence, Mad Meg ran at him screaming, tore across the pale man’s face with his nails, and then commanded the students to thrash him thoroughly and throw him from the hall, which—agreeable—they did, blood from brow to ankles; however, the students always add that Tabor was younger and stronger in that fabled and fantastic time, not ill and old and frail as he is now, so that now, they say smiling, there’s no danger—no direct, immediate, physical danger, that is—from Mad Meg himself, the students say, covering their grins with foam.
   Mad Meg peers at us expectantly. We know he does not want an answer. He inspects us calmly. He has no wish to see us, and we know he is not calm. Angrily he waits, but we know he is not waiting our reply. He is not calm, not angry, not expectant. Nevertheless we shift uneasily in our seats until he finally says, with weariness, from resignation; never mind. oh. never mind. It’s no use, he implies; it's discouraging; it’s sad, our ignorance is sad, deplorable, a bit disgusting, too; but there’s no help for it, we are stupid, absurd, unfeeling, we aren't wise; that’s that.
   Tabor’s attention is attracted by another phantom, another alleged fact. He scuttles across the platform, one arm trapped on his chest and struggling like a hare. The apparition might escape him, hide, become real. Or is there someone else in search of it—this fact, this dodo—a sociologist armed with a tape measure perhaps? Tabor is wary. But the datum, the wraith, appears to be bulky and difficult to manage. Indeed, it is fat. You are gross, he says, repulsive. Furious, he heaps insults on it. Whore, he shouts, you will give yourself to anyone. Despite this, he draws it from the air with his free hand and hugs it to him, driving out groans. We can see that it’s ugly, has sores which are oozing, flesh that flops. Suddenly he straightens like a soldier. He’s seen something; his nostrils quiver. He is an Indian in the movies. Culp couldn’t flare a nostril better. There.....over there.......there’s one that’s lonely, he an-
nounces, pointing. Shy as a maiden.....Reluctant.......Dim. Dim as a dead
bulb. Still it wishes to be illuminated. Tabor moistens his lips. Then he rushes toward us to pull a length of Greece or Turkey, god knows what, from someone's skittish, retractive lap.
   Magus Tabor. Mad Meg. He holds up a ghostly bucket. Full of them, he says—facts which we’ve seen him gather—little ones like pebbles, snails. Or like beads or buttons or bottlecaps. Coins. He rattles them around in the pail while we listen. Little lives, he says. Small deaths. Like marbles or matchcov-ers. Prizes in Cracker Jack. A soupgon of souls. Paper clips, knucklebones, candycorn, nails. Left over from the Franco-Prussian War. Jean Andre Veau, for instance. Heinrich Klein. Are they historical? Tabor is menacing. He waits, hands on hips, as if about to exercise. The little lives, their deaths—impatiently he taps with the toe of his shoe as he ticks them off: a, b, c, d, e,f, endlessly, g, h, i,j—are they historical? Lives lost at Cannae? or a man who might have died in Paris Sunday of the itch? And before this question, as before the others, we remain silent, watchful . . . silent.
   Tabor’s on to something. It’s lightly verdigrised, vast and reticular, yet he envelops it. The next one is craven; the next one is blue; the next one is badly bar-bered. He discovers more; he captures another: it’s long and thin—so thin and long he reels it to his thumb as though he’d cast it fishing. Like a magician pulling a silver dollar from an ear, he locates them behind curtains, under chairs, in thin air. He pretends, like a Mud Man, to fart a few. He hugs them all, gathering every kind together, while we sit mute . . . mesmerized. Why didn't we laugh? why didn’t we howl and shake and topple from our seats? No one in anger cried clown. He might have been Oedipus after his eyes, or Antigone mourning her brother . . . when he measured and he counted for us:
k, l, m . . .
   Strange, don’t you think, he says, that their deaths should be larger than their lives, as if there were more in their lack of being altogether than in their even having been at all; so much more, indeed, that existence seems to have reduced them, since before they lived their deaths were not only infinite, as all deaths are, but also unbroken, continuous . . . mark the n there, mark the o, the p . . . Again . . . again speech has spoiled silence . . . q, r, s, t. . . One thing—one thing exceeds the eternity of the star, he cries, and that is the dark which surrounds it.
   Tabor packs these trifles in the balls of his fists. Larger lumps emerge. They go packing in with the rest. I am asking them to surrender, to throw down singularity, he shouts, a new mood invading his face like a troop of horses with bugles, cracking flags. They must lose their beggarly independence—give over, I say—they must give up the pride they take in their regal isolation, the value they put upon particularity and foolish Polish uniqueness—every splash of
spittle is unique, so what of uniqueness?—give over, 1 say—and they must banish that vanity, gentlemen, and give it over, give over, for one death is nothing, one pain, one disappointment, one moment's triumph, taste of joy, is nothing, but ten thousand wounds are a battle, gentlemen, the assassination of a king, the ruin of an empire possibly, blood for a continent—in consequence, give over—for history, gentlemen, is American or Mongol, and likes both size and winning; so I’m insisting they unite, come out of their loneliness like sea lions from the sea; I am pressing against them with all my strength, rounding individuality, flattening character and region, sponging wind and shadow; I am for-for-forcing them together; I am comMANding them to merge.
   And we see his face flush and his whole body strain with the effort. He cannot swallow the air in his mouth. Swaying beneath his burden, he mounts the podium to unbosom and relieve himself. Abruptly his cheeks cave, gratefully he straightens, his arms fall like loose sleeves, and he looks down at his feet where we believe we perceive them too, now in one unsightly bundle, quite invisible and crossed with lines like ropes where they’ve been squeezed. Tabor inspects the result. He steps around it as around a puddle. He’s thoughtful, frowns. Gently he consoles his eyes. His fingers carefully remark his chin. The fragments hold together, he’s pressured them so strongly, but the lump’s unmelodious—a simple din of data. He takes another turn in silence and then extends toward us a hand expressive as his face; we are to see for ourselves—examine, verify. And so we do—incredibly we sit forward to scrutinize more closely his pliant little piles of space. Tabor pulls and pats the air a bit—they are kindly motions—-as he considers the configurations of his material, as he wonders, ponders, paces, calculates, construes. Suddenly—swiftly—he kicks it—once, twice—powerful, thrusting kicks which force him to snort as he delivers them, and then he falls on the area in a rage, pounding it with his fists, gouging and tearing, pulling off chunks and hurling them over his shoulder toward the places where we sit like bumpkins before a balancer—stupefied, enthralled, amazed. At last he retires from his fury, smiles, wags his head in a winning way, and says very soberly, in a mood of quite deliberate anticlimax, That is how you must work if you would give shape and life to history.
               A Fugue
   My dad wouldn’t let me have a dog. A dog? A dog we don’t need. My mom made the neighbor’s spitz her pal by poisoning it with the gin she sprinkled on
the table scraps. Feed it somewhere else, my dad said. A dog we don’t need. My dad wouldn’t let me have a dog. Our neighbor's spitz—that mutt—he shits in the flower beds. Dog doo we don’t need. At least feed it somewhere else, my dad said. My mom made the table scraps tasty for her pal, our neighbor’s spitz—that mutt—by sprinkling them with gin. You’re poisoning Pal, my dad said, but never mind, we don’t need that mutt. My mom thought anything tasted better with a little gin to salt it up. That way my mom made the neighbor’s spitz her pal, and maddened dad who wouldn’t let me have a dog. He always said we didn’t need one; they crapped on the carpet and put dirty paws on the pants legs of guests and yapped at cats or anyone who came to the door. A dog? A dog we don't need. We don’t need chewed shoes and dog hairs on the sofa, fleas in the rug, dirty bowls in every corner of the kitchen, dog stink on our clothes. But my mom made the neighbor's spitz her pal anyway by poisoning it with the gin she sprinkled on the table scraps like she was baptizing bones. At least feed it somewhere else, my dad said. My dad wouldn’t let me have a pal. Who will have to walk that pal, he said. I will. And it’s going to be snowing or it’s going to be raining and who will be waiting by the vacant lot at the corner in the cold wet wind, waiting for the damn dog to do his business? Not you, Billy boy. Christ, you can’t even be counted on to bring in the garbage cans or mow the lawn. So no dog. A mutt we don't need; we don’t need dog doo in the flower beds, chewed shoes, fleas; what we need is the yard raked, like I said this morning. No damn dog. No mutt for your mother, either, even if she tries to get around me by feeding it when my back is turned, when I’m away at work earning her gin money so the sick thing can shit in a stream on the flower seeds; at least she should feed it somewhere else; it’s always hanging around; is it a light string in the hall or a cloth on the table to be always hanging around? No. Chewed shoes, fleas, muddy paws and yappy daddle, bowser odor: a dog we don’t need. Suppose it bites the postman: do you get sued? No. I am the one waiting at the corner vacant lot in the rain, the snow, the cold wet wind, waiting for the dog to do his damn business, and I get sued. You don’t. Christ, you can’t even be counted on to clip the hedge. You know: snicksnack. So no dog, my dad said. Though we had a dog nevertheless. That is, my mom made the neighbor’s pal her mutt, and didn’t let me have him for mine, either, because it just followed her around—yip nip—wanting to lap gin and nose its grease-sogged bread. So we did have a dog in the house, even though it just visited, and it would rest its white head in my mother’s lap and whimper, and my father would throw down his paper and say shit! and I would walk out of the house and neglect to mow or rake the yard, or snicksnack the hedge or bring the garbage cans around. My dad wouldn’t let me have a dog. A dog? A dog we don’t need, he said. So I was damned if 1 would fetch.
                      In the Army
  We curled our toes as we were told and pushed off kicking. Our shouts splashed up in noise as indistinct and general as the mist which wet the walls. 1 always sought the quiet of the bottom when I could, but there were often too many of us, and we churned in the pool like netted tuna. They strip you of your friends first. They take away your home and all your belongings. They deprive you of family and city, landscape and sky, every familiar sight whether out-ofdoors or in before they bundle up your clothing. Even then you aren't naked enough to please them. Piranhas. My mother’s mouth, when 1 went to visit her, was full of holes where they'd removed her plate. Although I’m sunk in my bath and pleasure is like this steam around me, I’m compelled to remember those authorities again: the starched white sleeve which—with little pushes—persuaded my mother toward a chair; the low, hard, unsurprised voice which said, “So, you little shit, you would even steal from your parents!”; the sergeant who peered along our line and smiled into his clipboard: "Well, you really look like privates now,” he said. Certainly we laughed. Didn't the Jews laugh, sometimes, at the jokes of the Germans? So they cut you off from custom and consideration. You lose your honors and degrees: caps, medals, ribbons—signs of station—the trappings, regalia, and hoo-rah of office. Ceremony, etiquette, the stanchions of your daily life, are swept away, and with them all your ordinary expectations and hopes of men. They do not permit you to form new habits or retain old ones; hunger and disease render reason useless and even drain your mind of fantasy; you cease to dream. They poison you with pain, and outrage your feelings with pageants of cruelty until you’re numb and driven like a jackal from every relation. You are allowed no liberty of movement, no perception of distance or sense of time. They make you piss in public, shit on schedule, masturbate to tame their own erections. Each blemish—soul and body—every deformity, each fault or weakness, is an object of ridicule; scorn, contempt, and laughter envelop you like the din around the pool or my bath's steaming. You may cease to dream, but your warders do not. No—they dream aloud, and while awake, sleepwalk. Every unspeakable thing is spoken, every imagining is acted out; for they find themselves, in this small way, omnipotent—God of the Jews—and if, in their hearts, they hate (as who does not?), then at last they can hate completely, can carry out to consequence their enmity, into subsequence their lust, fill their feelings to conclusion like a cock that’s entered cunt. Even-
tually they compel you to act against your conscience, contrary to your nature, in defiance of every precept of morality and religion, until all that remains of you is your past, your prehensile tale, your history. Then they begin on that.
 Accusations of Platyhelminthism
   What should 1 say in my introduction? how shall 1 anticipate my summing up? Shall I say that the Jews would have made the ultimate citizens; that they were helpless as children and extorted their punishments; that they enjoyed injustice and had been long employed in the trade of suffering for superiority? Should I say they found it easier to wear the coronets of slaves than undertake the services of masters? What did they do but encourage theft and rape? They have always coveted possessions: their sons, their sheep, their soil, their silver; because without possessions they cannot be dispossessed—what sort of robbery is it to rob the poor? because the liberty they love, they love more to lose than exercise; because complaint is far sweeter than thanksgiving ... in ashes and tatters one is better dressed. Against the press of their enemies, they shape, they define, they choose themselves, and it tempts me to imagine how a cast might close on some soft resilient material, or my arms enfold an amorously willing woman. It is an evil religion that should spread such blame and turn into murderers an entire people, for they made themselves helpless as children, requiring us to wrong them. Yet was it so surprising: with God for their tyrant and father for their God? Still the Kingdom was always to come, for were the Jews to fulfill that covenant, its discharge would destroy the partnership, render pointless the contract; they’d gain land and life and lose the Lord. And another thing, Herschel, I say, to blunt one of his objections, when the Jews are firmly at home in Israel, they will make every effort to acquire the qualities which their enemies have always been accused of; they will practice aggression as though it were a new religious rite; and they will be as intolerant as any puritan. Israel, Herschel, just watch, will reject the historically determined character of the Jews. They will use their future to persecute their past. Herschel is of the opinion that God doesn’t merely grant the Jews Zion, the contract must be kept in force if Zion is to be sustained. I ask Herschel if the good Lord is in the protection racket, like the Mafia, but he only pulls a long face. So they lose the sheik of Sinai, Herschel, so what, they will still have the Law, and the Law is God at His Word. Yes, the Jews are people of principle, Tabor said, laughing; oh christ, he exclaimed, they are so German. Yes, these
were propositions of pleasure—they d please him. They were personal enough; they were perverse enough, false enough, true enough, funny enough, heartless enough for him. They take your clothes away. Strange that love should strip you too, so differently, the same.
               The Barricade
   1 built a barricade. My kids tried to dissuade me with lemonade and language, but I built it anyway. 1 have decided to depict life. There will be a whole row of representations. My wife resents it, but the barricade is built anyway. Boxes of sworn affidavits, cartons of cottage cheese, oysters hung from little wires. You wouldn't believe the strength of it. I tell my students to do something with their lives. Build a barricade. They expect it to be built of twine and birdlime, sputum, the usual. Official optimism. Old affections. Soft cheese will withstand almost anything. They expect it to be surreal. Heartbeats without hearts. That sort of old-hat hat. The wheels will have come off all the old barricades. You’ve done enough, my son said. For one, you haven’t written poetry. Rest on that laurel. I answered gruffly: You can’t build a barricade with images, transparencies, figures of speech, madames reclining on divans and other deeds, gowns by David, picnics on the grass, and such like. They terrify the blind. My wife said, then my first son said, then my second son said: 1 don’t want to be in your barricade. 1 said: You’re in. Things are our only feelings, 1 said. Collect them. Use them. Treasure them. For instance: the vacuum cleaner, Uncle Balt's hunting license, that congealed smear of jelly on the kitchen counter. I could have fooled everyone and built it of street stones and desktops and lawn chairs. But I chose not to. The best barricades have heretofore been built of ineffables ineffability, nowadays, wouldn’t hold up a steamer trunk. Memories of Calais, the Ivory Coast. Not my memories, of course. Nor yours. Malraux looting the Orient. My wife wants a reason why I am building a barricade. The night you threw the dinner down the stairs. To start with. It has been suggested that I dig a ditch, play take-away, make a moat, but it’s too late for that, the vans have dumped their cargos. I left the house. Went walking through the fields, lit only by snowlight. You pitched the veal into the basement because, in the kitchen, cleaning up after the soup, I had wrinkled my nose at the sauce. Our guests sat patiently in their chairs. It was reported to me that you said: There is no main course now, only salad; there’s no more host, either; he’s out pissing at the stars. Tics are good in barricades, but bar-
ricades cannot be built of small talk or expansive gestures. Large talk is entirely too clumsy. Lets arrows drift in. Talk is really not a good material, large or small or medium. For several days, slices of veal and spattered sauce lay on the cellar stairs like dog cough. Finally they disappeared. 1 think the kids cleaned the mess up. Yawns, too, are useful in the barricade. 1 throw in poor Kafka’s haunted chest. Just for luck. What does it still need, deep, tall as it is? . . . like spikes atiptop, gleaming canisters of hiss.
                                                               SEPT.
                               Mad Meg
  You know, Kohler, Tabor told me (we were standing in his study, he on one side of his desk like a bookcase, and 1 on the other like a basket), the finest molding of the facts, the grace and beauty we can give them, the forms we can fashion for accidents of the grossest kind, those which have the ring of a real Ding (he smiled wanly as he always did at his multilingual jokes), depends upon whether we are working in virgin territory. Thucydides knew what he was doing. By now the Napoleonic Wars are an old picnic ground— nothing left but the leavings, everything trodden on and trampled over. Ever try to remove a path through a meadow? There’s no eraser which will rub it out. Replant the grasses if you wish but the cattle will go to water in the same way. You have to plough up the whole field. You have to alter all objectives. Falsify true north. At first the facts are there to be created, but after a few slew-footed historians have tracked the snow, only another snow will seem to restore it. Even then the old shoe prints will remain, frozen beneath the fresh sheets—bruises underneath the tan, scratches slicked by polish. Your Civil War—Lee at Gettysburg—his presumed mistakes—the futile cavalry charge—there’s a case. That battlefield is now like the town dump, however it looks. Take my advice, Kohler. Make the present your past. Don’t sleep in a slept-in bed. Break maidenheads like balloons. Seduce the innocent like a salesman. Impregnate events with your own seed. 1 wish I’d done that. My god, the Greeks! The German mind has been so sodomized by those splendid pederasts, we don’t know which of our holes is for what. Tabor screwed one thumb into the hollow of his fist. Enter the flux, man, before it gets frozen over. Write about change, about what you’ve seen with your own eyes, factory smoke, kids playing rob-the-candy-store. Write about
transformation. Avoid love. He pulled his thumb forcibly away like a Dutch boy done with his duty, and threw me a sly look. Write about Being, my boy. Write about me.
    Is writing to yourself a sounder madness?
                    Immense journey; rainy and dreary and bad roads. Night, joked Mallet too much; wrong. ’Tis below you. Tis bad habit. No more of it. Told my Lord of being Catholic. Wrong, for he has not studied it, and cannot understand.
    Immense journey.
                     Hard students are commonly troubled with gowts, catarrhs, rheums, cachexia, bradypepsia, bad eyes, stone, and collick, crudities, oppilations, vertigo, winds, consumptions, and all such diseases as come by over-much sitting ...
    Life in a chair.
             Mad Meg
   The study of history, gentlemen, the study of history is not the study of people and events, forces and movements, wars and revolutions . . . bradypepsia = slowness of digestion crudities = undigested matter in the stomach oppilations = obstructions cachexia = defective nutrition
                  = a depraved condition of the body = a depraved habit of mind, of feeling = a depraved condition of the State kakos
   Now I remember where I happened on it: that idea of the novelist as an historian of little lives—lives lost at Cannae, etc. It’s Eliot closing Middle-march. I’ve looked it up.
         ... for the growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts; and that things are not so ill with you and me as they might have been, is half owing to the number who lived faithfully a hidden life, and rest in unvisited tombs.
   She must mean those who swell the ranks at riots, who comprise mobs, witness executions, contribute to the church. What of those, though, who were simply consumed?
   If the camel’s back is broken, a detailed “history” of the straw (how its seed was sown, the earth encouraged, stems mown, thrashed, spread out to dry, raked back and stacked, and each straw carried to the animal) will not render an account of it: that’s what she means.
   If the camel’s back breaks because of a little straw, the weakness is clearly in the camel who could not bear the load, whose bones snapped under stress— the stress of straw.
   What are we to say of those straws which were piled on perversely after the collapse?
   If the camel’s back is broken, as Mad Meg might have said, how the burdensome straw was planted, grown, cut, baled, and tied cannot matter to the weight, cannot add its bulk to the load as the straw adds straw to straw, its light to light, until the snap; so if the camel’s back breaks, cracks at last, and halves of him fall dumpily in facing ditches, no single straw is responsible, not the first straw or the last; for in adding a column, though we reach the sum in a certain way (top to bottom, as it may be our habit to begin, or bottom to the top first, as our fancy takes us), the amounts in the total, as mere amounts, are disposed in no order, are quite anonymous, have no separate life and no sort of priority, in fact aren’t even straws at all but only thin disguises of that dullard, Mass, and its, in this case, insupportable gravity.
   One Jew destroyed, then, two, a dozen, thirty-five, and it is normal, ordinary, everyday—it’s simply war—highways kill more on Labor Day—but murder hundreds, cinder thousands, and these longer, therefore grander, numbers weigh upon us, since (straws the same as pigs of iron) Jews weigh too; for we have paid in thousands for our cars and houses; we understand such sums, and they invite terror into our imaginations: this is human, we wonder; this is German? while by simple repetition, by passing mechanically beyond the thousands and numbering their deaths like stars, the very multitude of the corpses makes the murders magical, fabulous—heaven help us, heroic even—as the years and battles of the Trojan War or Saturn aswallow his children; and the barbarous Germans recede to Olympus or make earthquakes in Thessaly, throw Titans in Tartarus, and their acts partake of the terrible, the awesome
Sublime, like storms at sea or an avalanche in the Alps, thundering relentlessly across some movie’s patient screen; and 1 wonder what Jew should be chosen to represent the death that went too far, the one too many that brought the cost home to us like general conscription or a fresh rise in our taxes: the ninety-first? four-hundredth? thousand-and-third? and I wonder again what other one it was that, as his body turned into a rope of smoke, took from us all sense of tragedy and disaster, because that Jew should be commemorated too, inasmuch as the Final Solution and Settlement of the Jewish Question was a grandiose undertaking, an immense memorial to death, to human inhumanity, like one of the pyramids, and don’t we stand cameled in their shadow now, the slaves erased by sublimes of time, to tourist at their size?
             Mad Meg
   His voice was rather high, always precise, very measured and penetrating, never sweet, at its worst hard and shrill as a metal whistle, and initially his repetitive declamatory style was annoying, with its tendency to accelerate and to wind itself up like a mechanical spring; but later one realized that speaking without notes as he did, as if spilling his heart, simply spilling his heart like a tipped cup, he could not have formed his sentences so surely, involved as they sometimes were, or deepened his thought as rivers wear a channel, if he had not composed in the manner of Homer, chanting an earlier formula while his mind flew over the flood ahead, wound like a hawk to its tower, searching for a bit of land to cry, and anything alive.
   It’s not the study of kings and princes, gentlemen . . . the study of history. He wore drab clothes for the most part. It’s not the study of classes. His tie would be crookedly knotted, and as his illness wore on, his clothes fit less well and were put on badly. Gentlemen . . . It’s not the study of forces—laws or causes—history. He pulled the same bells—his whole weight on the ropes— the mind could not penetrate their ringing, penetrate to Tabor. Tabor kept a wad of handkerchief in the side pocket of his coat and from time to time he
would take it out and stopper his mouth. Clan or family?----no. Genius, fate
or fortune? -----no. Gods? ------no. Heroes? ------never. Neither time nor
time’s occasioning. It was as if he were putting a curb on himself, as if there were something inside himself speaking, so that he, in a sense, always both spoke and listened, was both moved and shocked, honestly surprised by what he heard, shaken by the import of it, frightened and angered, driven by feeling
from word to word like a sled at great speed, like a bob down a steep twisting run; for it was never the track which terrified, the place of the turns which amazed, but the hurtle at which they were taken, the recklessness of the drive, and the constant danger of the passage down in consequence which terrified; and he took us all with him when he went, that was the worst of it; he laughed at our laughter, our skepticism, our rejection in principle of such effects, of these tirades in the classroom, the demagoguery of Mad Meg, and he swept us along through absurdity, dazzled us like country maidens with glass and glitter, frightened us with heights we hadn t thought we’d scaled to, and caused the hair on our napes to rise, to run from its roots, when he looped us down the long slopes of his speech.
   There was a metaphysics behind Mad Meg’s manner, and I began, very slowly, to understand parts of it. His fascination with the negative did not merely demonstrate his love of a sophistical trick, although he frequently opened his lectures with a rattle of rhetorical denials which he hurled at his audience like a fistful of stones: You thought X was Y, didn't you? you callow dunces, you clowns in cloth caps [and then, picking particularly on me by suddenly focusing, as was his habit, on a single victim], you—is Iowa in Missouri, Kohler?—you Missouri mules. The truth was that like a drunken, immoderate Parmenides, Tabor believed that anything of which you could form a passionate conception automatically was, because the pure purpose of things lay in their most powerful description (an apple was a means to that end—to its theoria, to “the theater of its thought”—and it was not, for heaven’s sake, its seeding, fruiting, eating, which counted). The miracles of the eucharist, Meg said, did not have to undergo the humiliation of being suggested by things—a word which lay in his scorn like a fleck of food in spittle.
   One morning so early the sun was still unripe, we spoke of the problem. I had brought Tabor some books he had wished to examine before class, but not every one he had asked for, and 1 reminded him, quite glibly and quite in passing, that in Kant negation was a category. Properly so. Correct. Of course. He slapped at some sunshine which had lit on his desk. You are thinking of the book you didn’t bring? You are thinking that being here and not being here are both modes of Being? He made a low noise which I had come to call his Husserl hum. These puzzles—they do have delightful exteriors, charming entrances, but let me tell you, Kohler, inside that ontological shack there are more than powdered whores or empty beds or open closets, hangers still swaying from the late departure of their coats. He conducted the motion. I had not eaten, and I was not alert. Alas, Kant was thinking of ordinary qualities like light and warmth—intensities, degrees of sensation—and of nothing so subtle as the miserable occasion when a charming Madchen says she no longer loves
you and you feel that lack against your lips like a cold spoon. Tabor sighed as if from remembrance. 1 felt it was staged. Not that he might not have just such a remembrance and have sighed at the thought of it. The universe is webbed with Thou-shalt-nots, the non-latitudes—lines one cannot cross at peril of one’s being. Imagine studying to be a duck. Tabor waited for me to smile but I did not. That you are not a turnip, Kohler, is a forgivable failing, but there are an indefinite number of merely formal negations of which it still makes sense to accuse you—that you can’t write Russian, for instance, which is true enough, though needlessly abstract and so-what. He pointed with a finger too unsteady to be stern. What does this sickly patch of sun signify? what shall we say? that the day has not reached noon? Tabor looked at me sadly, as one might at a tire that was flat. Must a word mean all it may mean in every place and use? How foolish. How unlike words, eh? This puny piece of light here—it could tell us the time, of course, but in these sentences which our little lives are shaping now, in our presence and our talk, it is merely another splash of piss from the indifferent gods, showered down impassively as idle dogs will yellow snow. There are no merely formal realities among phenomena, Kohler, I’m convinced, and some zeros are no more than hoops; but what is more positively present than an empty purse when you've already sullied the sauerkraut and eaten all the wurst? or the fact that you can’t swim when your canoe has overturned and water is entering your lungs? He turned a pocket out with a swift and simple gesture 1 can now compare to the way we tug a Kleenex from its box. What is it the eunuch says to the fair woman he finds naked on the beach? Voltaire puts it in Italian: 0 che sciagura d’essere senza coglioni! In Italian. How delicate of the old squid. O what a time to be without testicles! There wasn’t even any lint in the crease, and Tabor stuffed the pocket back into its pocket. You look German, Kohler, you simply schein of Germany, eh? I had been surprised by the seriousness of his tone, and now, as I began to understand the reason for it, it began to change. Those little flecks of sun lay on his desk in a way his consciousness did not, and it was that absence (not the missing book on—perhaps it was Pindar) which disturbed him. 1 shrugged modestly. There is nothing genuinely German about me, I’m afraid, I said. Tabor sat slowly in his chair and held his knees tightly against his chest with his arms. Later I learned that this way he could keep his limbs from trembling. During the last few months of his illness, he would try to twine about himself the way single strands are woven to make a hawser. Rolled up like that, though, he resembled a pot about to boil, because he continued to shudder to the very center. You look German—ah!—but you are not. Not! Yet what has your body displayed but the pure clear colors of the Reich? that short blond hair, that belly, that fat flushed face? You must be Dutch at any rate. Yet you are not! You
see me sitting here now—calm and still. Yet I am not. My face is smiling, yet 1 am not. My mouth is not mincing words, yet—ah!—1 am mincing mine. Here, in my heart—Tabor looked sadly at the knob of his left knee—there is nothing but scrambled type in a printer’s box. How often is our life the elaboration of our disguises, of what we’re not and cannot really be, like that shrewdly named butterfly, the viceroy, don’t you call it? who mimics the monarch so cleverly. How about all those cowardly animals and fish and birds who rattle and puff and growl and strut? Man has invented a creature of culture and refinement which he then pretends to be—like the crocodile supines the fallen tree, the toad the mossy rock. So you and I, Kohler, we become confused about our Being. We begin to believe we are our hypocrisies . . . We free the negative and let the positive go hang. We proclaim the ultimate value of man in the face of his palpable worthlessness. We say that men seek to preserve their own lives when everywhere man is evidently suicidal. 1 saw his knuckles whiten and a line along his jaw like a slash of chalk. When I am dead . . . When I am dead, you see, my absence from these genial rooms, the freedom of these books from my clumsy hands, he said, will be like Bismarck’s: purely formal. I’ll not be a wad of lost marks to anybody’s wallet. No sorrow shall sustain my ghost. But now, observe me. I sit here like a nervous diner, and though I feel my purse press against me, my bundle of money like an amorous swelling, I can still imagine that it’s home on my dresser; I can still imagine how my face will burn with shame when 1 discover it is gone; so when 1 look at these books, this room, at you, I experience my cancellation, my complete crossing out, with a pang like a tolling bell. My illness is alive, the threats to my life are real; yet it is only my death 1 feel, only the lessening made by my own loss. I am gone, Kohler, right now; and who is so dead as one so dead to a moment of life that life can’t raise him up? Not to be here, not to see tomorrow—which, when I see it 1 shall find as stupid and empty as I found today— is appalling, Kohler, appalling ... to slip into the insignificance of history like a thought held in a dream . . .
   As his illness fluttered his flesh like a flag, and his public speech came more and more to resemble a parade, with me he became calmer and sometimes even confidential. Nonetheless, I never learned much about his private life— his women weren’t private—so I never knew how he spent his time, or what he thought about when he wasn’t working, and perhaps he hadn’t a private life at all, but aside from sex, maybe he was only an historian and orator. In a sense, his whole life was secret, for what he really thought, what he really believed, he kept hidden the way the dreamer hides his dream. He ate greedily, and that was the manner, 1 always supposed, in which he made love, but you could be certain of nothing with Tabor, for he was an absolute actor, and perfectly capable of raising and sustaining a purely rhetorical erection.
   I have found that my moods tend to alter with the weather, which is one reason, I expect, why the last spring of Magus Tabor’s life is still so vivid for me. The season was a perfect mix of hot and cold, wet and dry, and offered proof that the preference of the ancients for harmony and balance was not mistaken. One could move in and out of one’s room or one’s clothes without any sense of effort or discomfort. Every baby in Germany had been unbundled and set out in the sun along with the cats and the potted plants. Windows were wide and bedding had been hung from them like party banners, while doors were wedged or propped open with crocks or clothing irons and the walks in front of them were sluiced each morning with the laundry suds. Vines brightened the dour walls of the university with fresh leaves, tulips were in full ceremony, and the park paths and courtyards were busy with reading, strolling, basking people. I think Tabor felt the extended mildness as an additional affront, for he was in extremis, dying as he had lived, wholly out of whack and balance. The sky, the air, the public mood, was calm and unruffled, while the configurations of Tabor’s face went this way and that as if it were a pond someone had pelted. One door of Tabor’s ancient office opened on the hall where the students straggled, another led into a crooked narrow corridor which brought him to the room where he lectured, while the third made available the promenade around the inner courtyard of the building, and there I beheld and there I held him, his trembling echoing in me as vibrations do, picking up a sympathetic response, and advancing through my adjoining body by degrees. There were just enough eddies in the air to refresh but not to cool; gentle, light, it still held the scents of the vines like fine spirits in a snifter. Birds bathed in little puddles of dust or were busy with their nesting rituals. Weak as he was, Tabor stumbled on a curb and his clutch on my arm grew suddenly strong. The grass by the walk looked fresh yet no damper than a licked lip. A petal or two of forsythia hung on, but most of the earlier blooms had gone. History is as full of knots as a pine plank, Tabor said, apropos of nothing 1 could recall. I think 1 shall have to. write a book about you, he said, since I can’t count on your writing one about me. He paused for my bashful smile to disappear. He knew I was distracted. My shoulder, where he shook, had begun to shake my spirit, and my shaken spirit was breaking up. I shall call it Conversations with Kohler. In my silence, he sighed. In the past he would have cackled. It will contain two truths . . . yes ... my two truths. He released his grip on my arm and leaned against me like a broom. We were speaking a while back about nothing—doesn’t everyone?—about nothingness, the naught; don't you say?—of the ‘not’ that is, nicht wahr, and the not’ that’s not? This bench here should be far enough. I realized that he was trying his best to be brave, to carry on in the old style, letting his mind dart, letting the silver flanks of his thought flash. He slipped along my side like a coat coming off and sat shivering on the iron. Kohler, do I strike you
as slow and apathetic? do I feel wormy, eh? I must move the deliberate way I move, you know, because I am higgledy-piggleding all over myself. You know, you understand, of course, you’re not a nit, but my damn doctors—oh, I have doctors now, Kohler, and they and my disease have me—well, they don’t know. It’s like hiring the crows who will peck your lights out. Can’t they see? will they listen? 1 am the habitation of my ailment, the landlord of this quake. I am the earth, here, that heaves. So if I say so and so about myself, am I not so—just as 1 say 1 am? No ... it turns out. No. 1 am not. Doctors . . . Hell’s invention. Into whose skill-less hands and nerveless fingers we fall when our hardihood stumbles. Doctors . . . Better to find a deep ditch and throw yourself upon its tender muddles. Well, they’re off course, my doctors. I should be staring fixedly into the middle distance, they say. Do I stare fixedly into the middle distance? Tabor jerked his head grotesquely. 1 never look at middles. Am I a man of the crotch? He made a face that I think was to stand for a laugh. The near and far fill up my sight to its brim like a bucket. I overflow with the far off. So, if 1 say so . . . No, they are aground again, my damn doctors. Wrong once more. Dead dead dead wrong. Then came the cackle.
   It wasn't until our conversation was concluded, and 1 had an opportunity to ponder it, that I remembered the earlier one I’ve just troubled myself to set down, one which seemed so fresh to Tabor he still carried on the pun: he peered through the “naught” hole. How such things humored him. Unlike Culp's jokes, which are generally comfortable and clubby, Meg’s were deeply derisive and unsettling. Was there a river of this “double’’ talk in his head, and was it, 1 wondered, mainly an ongoing “conversation with Kohler" he was having now? Either he wasn't saying much, or its substance was all in the margins. Could his obsession with my listening ear be another manifestation of his disease? Historians—his head shook as he spoke (wobbled, 1 should say), as he tried to wag it in Mad Meg’s old ironic way—historians speak of everything but the truly historical. The historical they put in a footnote. The historical they mention in passing. He grinned. 1 amuse myself, don’t 1? Don’t stand, Kohler. Sit here beside me. That means I am not apathetic. Surely my caretakers can see that. You see, of course, you see, but my doctors have but one eye apiece screwed like a monocle in their assholes, and it takes a pair of them, squatting over something like binoculars focused on the jakes, to spot anything: a turd. These failures of taste dismay me, he knows that. He wants me to sit beside him. Why don’t I?
   Ordinary men—well—ordinary men feel with what, Kohler? with their hands, hey? or their dicks; but my fizzicians have neither. And ordinary men— well men think with what they’ve felt—what the dick prongs, they ponder—at least that; but these medicos of mine have nothing but their instruments and
their arrogance. I amuse myself, eh? but you 1 do not amuse . . . serious American, gothic Yankee. You Americans approach history like an official with his hand out. From history you want a vote or a bribe. My fag docs palp. Am 1 some peach they’re going to buy? They palp like ponces. They punch my groin. They probe my buttocks. Then they guess where they’ve got to: where is the donkey? And pin the tail on its tender nose. And they give expensive advice and peremptory orders—so easily. Do, they shout like drill sergeants. That’ll be one million marks. Don't, they holler. That'll be a million million. I should look them in the eye, but am I a dog to sniff after their asses? Fido do! Fido don’t! Tabor tries to lift his leg as if to wet the bench.
   We won t think of them now, Kohler. Let us fly away like these birds and bellow in a bush. We shall consider the momentous steps the mind took during the two generations between Socrates and Aristotle. We shall go back to that fairy tale time when there were no abstract conceptions—five demonstrated that, out of Homer and Hesiod and others, I’ve proved it like a pointed pistol— and now we re where we can watch Socrates take that psyche that’s been wallowing around, defined by this or that, by blood, shadow, or air, wallowing like a sow, and give us one pure knight of armored emptiness as its definition instead—one! the soul. The soul, Kohler! One—but what a one, eh? all cleaned up and free of physis. The old animal or vegetable mover of the body becomes the soul, and if the soul moves the body, we ought urgently to study what moves it, eh?—perfect. Never mind its figmentary nature. The soul—hoh—what a thought! Then—then Plato— Shit. 1 am not alive, my illness is alive, just look at it dance. Do you hear a band? some vomit of sound. Plato— My doctors call it an illness. It's not an illness. I've not caught cold. It is a revolution. It is a war. 1 hear cannons going off. I hear no band—no—guns and trumpets. Plato— Plato peopled the whole space of the spirit with them—these lean abstractions and replacements for the gods. Ach, god. Doctors have eyes that pinch and prick, Kohler, squeeze and slice. Don’t let them look at you with their knives. It'd be safer to have a staring contest with an evil eye. These benches—it’s like sitting on a griddle. So—in thirty years—a generation—-roughly—well, not that roughly, either—because of the work—the brains—of these three Greeks— mankind advances from names to concepts. We get there: think of it! thought can be thought at last. You know 1 shake so steadily I could bring myself off simply by holding my cock in my fist. But I prefer that the whores tremble until their trembling trembles it. Up the stairway to the stars, eh? from things to thoughts of things, from thoughts of things to thoughts of thoughts, from thoughts of thoughts to thoughts as things again. Hurray, hey? Infect the fuckers with the shakes, I say. So I embarrass you, Kohler. I do not amuse you but I embarrass you; I embarrass you but I instruct. So the cogito, you see, was
reached very early on in our Western life, before its calling out in Latin or in French. Fuck the French. Meanwhile, what is our historian doing? Fie is nin-nying along about the Athenian state, its quarrels with Sparta, and other Ther-mopyludics. Very amusing. They all go their own way, these muscles. Hip hop. Hop hip. The whores tremble to their tubes. Amazing. Sit. Why don’t you sit? You know I don’t like to look up. Good. Then in the immediately following moment (and here we can observe causality operating, Kohler; we can watch one thought actually bring about another), Aristotle invents—okay, he finds—creates—the logic of the syllogism . . . and my good friend, the European mind is now in being! Well, the discovery of logic is nothing compared to the discovery of rhetoric . . . still . . . neither, you know, is an event in the same sense as a battle is, or an election, or the reign of a pope, is it? or shipping the syph back from the Indies. Ah, the syph. You know it lives between the moist lips of the ladies. Oh yes. Men merely transport this animosity from one home to another, but it’s the cunt that contains it. The wives and whores of the soldiers, the sailors. Tabor’s shaky voice grew smooth and dreamy. The syph . . . another insufficiently acknowledged element in history . . . the syph ... the syllogism and the syph . . .
   1 can't immediately recall the kind of bird it was that began to cross the walk in front of us. It was an impressive bird, perhaps a jackdaw—yes—a large black bird, but not a crow or raven. Yellow eyes. Yellow beak. What does it mean if a black bird crosses your path, Tabor said, as if speaking to the bird. I ventured to suggest that since we were seated, going nowhere, there was no path of ours for the bird to cross. Going nowhere is right. A black bird crossed our path on our way to nowhere. But he is going somewhere, I imagine. Well, in what place will you find an account of it—this singular occurrence—this triumph of intelligence? Only in those backwater bibles, the philosophy texts—those are the places—and in them—well, they like to pretend the mind has always existed, even before men, and there—wherever “there" is—ideas tip timeless hats to one another, decorous as deacons, and never so much as waddle once in the world like that bird. How willfully he walks. Yet he’s wound up. What drives the soul of the bird? And to what lofts, eh? to what worms? I’m not apathetic, am I? I’m alert. Yes? Bright-eyed like that bird. Black-hearted as he is and happy with it. The cackle came from Mad Meg’s mouth, I thought, in the dark likeness of the bird which flew away with one energetic fan of its wings. There! in just that kind of whoof men once stopped trying to think in verse or in desultory talk and sought the solidity of formal speech, the written dialogue where prose appears—prose, Kohler, is less primitive than poetry—and soon afterward history commences, the narrative mode arrives like rescuing cavalry in your movies, annals replace anecdote—until that, in turn, is abandoned for the
security of the scientific treatise, a format which Aristotle again—that divinity-licked into final shape. Immense moments, Kohler, immense, but where will you find them in our knotholed histories? alongside some detailed and eloquent discussion of the invention of musical notation? hah, no, not a chance, that's another knot, isn’t it? which won’t be touched or untied, let alone cut, not even by those know-it-alls, the red Jews, either, or the Russianized rads who think history is economics, and who only want to know when we stopped exchanging fucks for favors, and when the first coin was struck and the first pimp paid in the hard cash of his whores trade, or when our money got soft as though it were our manhood going limp, or when we invented credit or began collecting usurious interest or selling protection or insurance—all those jew-smart articles of trade—knotholes they finally looked through the way that freak Freud peeked in at his parents' bed and saw the primal scene (how shocking! she sleeps on his side!); but the Semites have no time for the denial of the parallel axiom or the discovery of perspective—knots which don’t fit the sizes of their eyes.
                 Crow—0 crow— don’t cross my path, so my life lasts a little longer.
   It was as if a tap had been turned, or a switch, perhaps the bird had recalled Tabor to the world; at any rate, he was clearly listening, sniffing the air, trying to respond to the spring. All this seems quite real, almost store-bought, don't it, he said at last, his grammar deliberately ruining his rhetoric. The day is so balmy, so gemiitliche, so German. Mild und leise. We know the history of these walls; we recognize these vines, these beds of flowers; we nod to acquaintances who pass and who nod in reply; we read our warmth in centigrades, and the blue sky and these shafts of shadow, too, are understood and placed comfortably in our experience. Yes, we sit here on these icy iron slats—I in my ague, and you in your youth; 1 in my Germanness, and you in the soft feathers of a scarcely fledged Yank; you in the heaven of your health, and 1 in the hell of my illness—we sit here and share, don’t we believe? a common world; and occasionally we even think there are some things about it we cannot change— which won’t budge—even if I put on an eyeshade and you take to drink. We say of what we share that it’s "out there.” Yet we can also imagine many who might come and sit here in this benevolent environment beside us, and who might in that moment feel they were members of our community, who would nevertheless be convinced that the steps which brought them to their seat on this bench
were directed by the stars; others might come to sit here, and sigh as we sigh, who believe that this delicious day was the gift of a god whose holiness was so substantial everywhere, he had to inhabit the black bird and broken walk as well as the flaring flower there, that dented downspout, that inadvertent basin, while being, at the same time, wholly withdrawn and immeasurably far off. See the situation, Kohler? What will the mind do with this day—this peaceful moment, this warm spring Fohn—but devour it. Yes, for some who might dawdle here to admire the sweet air as we do, everything about the hour could be accidental as a spill of beans, while for others every little whiff and stuttered whistle is prefigured as perfectly as the text of a book, or is laid down by laws as irreversible as Time; and for them history is hard as these slats and rigid as their iron. Sure, there will be those who will spoon this weather like a pudding, while it will seem to the suspicious a siren luring them from their duties. The history of that mind 1 spoke of a moment ago when I was praising its discovery, that history is one of abominable confusion . . . abominable.
   And the worst confusion is embodied in the belief that the mind has something to do with reason. As if the syllogism made sense! Or we paid the least attention to it!
   Across the courtyard a young woman’s voice began singing. They never let up, do they, Meg said sourly. They never let up. It's not enough the birds have to fright the ear, now every cunt must whistle. Contagion . . . contagion . . . We’ll not listen. We ll not hear.
                Crow—0 crow— each time you pass, my sickness grows a little stronger.
   Kohler, we could not—just as a joke or a small amusement—contrive between us an imbecility that has not been, or could not become, the blueprint for a life, and not for one Dummerjan by himself, either, caught in a craze of his own, but for a community, a country, a continent, by god—a family, a nation, a race. The glorious Greeks, Kohler, even they believed a dozen different things about the universe, each so stupid it would soil the tongue to talk about even one; and the Romans subscribed to religions as if they were monthly magazines or a box at the opera. It is a dismaying spectacle, alternately ludicrous, tragic, absurd, insane.
   Just the other day a man of my acquaintance advised me, for my shakes, to soak myself in melted lard. And how many maladies has drinking piss removed? Thank god that girl has halted her screeching. Which reminds me of the cures
caused by mumbo-jumboing and rattle shaking, drum bumping and endless chanting, or all those awful things hung around the neck or worn around the wrist or sniffed or swallowed. And the leeches at their medical labors, eh? And all the cipher experts, the Cabalists, the numerologists, the fortune-tellers, astrologers, mediums, crystal gazers, palmists, cardplayers—count 'em—and the ghost lovers and the necrophiliacs. No end. No end. No end. Consider, to be a Hindoo, what you have to believe about the world; think, to be a Jew, what you have to keep like a cold in your head; imagine for a moment the alchemist among his pots, his tubes and retorts, or the followers of the flat earth, as if it might float away, and the farts that must fog his mind; or the contortions one must perform to be a Calvinist, a Catholic, or any Christian, people who will let a little sprinkle purify them or believe a bottle of two-thousand-year-old blood has become wine. Or how about those Jews who threw off Judaism in order to embrace an equally vicious myth, the one made up by that man Marx? 1 have already told you: it was the money in the vision—the round world was a coin in that man's keeping—that was what did it. Hey. The Bedouin is buried in the sand, your Indians dance around a silly fire and run from spirits in the dark, Aztecs cut out the heart, someone has tied down the sun with string, we shall rise from the dead, our bodies regurgitated by the disgusted worms. There is no end to human foolishness, Kohler, no end, no end, no end, our black hearts have no bottom, and literally there is no end; there will be no end until we all end, and mankind murders itself in a fit of just deserts.
                 I’m carrion, crow—
                 how well you know me:
   It does not take a mind for there to be madness; we have always been mad; madness was before mind; and then contagion takes place . . . seeping inside the soul ... the syph . . . contagion ... the syph of religion, hey? the VD of belief, the clap of commerce ... So keep kosher, okay? So keep your cock in your fist, okay? Hey? Keep safe, Magus, they always told me, as a way of saying good evening after an evening of paid-for poltroonery—hey, right word?—anyway they spoke too late. So I tell you now the first of my two truths, both illustrated by our simply sitting here, you in your youth and I in my rage. Tabor took an arm out of his coat and slowly extended it as he might have pointed a stick. Heaven and hell share a common frontier. You may suppose, if you like, that one is Germany, the other, France, or that they meet like earth and sky. In any case, that truth is the first one. Try to remember it by remembering how our two bodies touch, and our two minds, too; how you stand and I sit; how 1 shake and you steel yourself against it. You do. It's true. And that is it—yes—nothing more—the first truth.
   I had heard the two truths before. They weren’t always the same, certainly their phrasing was in constant flux, as well as their defense, and sometimes there were three.
   Whatever the world really is; whatever we share when we think we share something; whatever the truth turns out to be, including the possibility that the truth was turned out of this world like a disgraced daughter long ago; in short, whatever remains and acts with regularity and can be counted on, whatever that whatever is, Kohler: this much is true of it, even of the untruthful part, namely that reality permits us to believe anything or its opposite, as we wish, even both at the same time; it allows us to be stupid and willful and perverse and blind without any special penalty, to live in a daydream or a nightmare, as one drugged or drunk or worse, to follow any religion, ideology, or myth, any half-baked scheme our wretched wants miscook; and while in our delusion, while traveling our dream streets day after day, and confessing our sins and sacrificing our virgins and circumcising our cocks and lighting candles in front of crudely colored crockery and cursing people who eat with spoons, sticks, fingers, differently from us, and killing those who have hair in their noses, or those who fail to fart after eating beans, or those who spit upon our sacred shadows, who refuse to banish their unclean women to the blood huts, as well as those who put vinegar in milk, chlorine in water, feet in shoes, even so, while our minds miscarry, we nevertheless fuck, we grow fat, we multiply; yes, that “out there,” that it, that other, lets us make fools of ourselves and prosper; we can waltz while the world ends and worry about what will cure warts; but the wonder of it is, Kohler, that as heedless as we invariably are about consequences, we shall waltz to music by Strauss and Mozart, dance divinely on the edge of doom; the head cold of a Milton, the mist in Blake, can encourage the divinest poetry, inspire a Dante; we can paint lies so allegorically belief will run to catch up, and create a culture out of sheer kookiness the eyes of others will envy, emulate, admire, adopt. Look: the fellatrix is beautifully carved. In that canvas, the Turk’s head is sliced sublimely. Positions for screwing become sacred, Kohler, can you believe it? China, India, Egypt, Rome, Greece, Persia: each was a civilization built on war and hyperactive imbecility (name one that wasn’t); each was steeped in beliefs so weak they'd never brew tea, in beliefs so casually inept (though ardently defended) the world—whatever that wondrous mystery is—splits its sides laughing; yet in each of these countries, too, there were cultures undeniably great, ways of life both noble and grand. That is why I say what I say, Kohler. Reality suffers fools. This is my other truth, by no means second in stature, not a centimeter shorter. Our Hindoo—the one we imagined sitting here beside us—all right, the one 1 imagined sitting here beside us—he is not struck down by his cruel and selfish stupidities (suttee, for instance, eh?), nor does the Jew trip on his beard on the way to the bank;
there are always fresh hearts to cut out, untouchables abound; there is no end of helpful enemies; hate is such a healthy enterprise it is always setting up fresh shops. Greeks, Turks, Armenians, Serbs—whoo! No, reality does not punish wickedness; reality does not send the ignorant to their doom; reality does not compel some sorts of assent and repel others; and rather than say, as your good Kipling does, that every bloody one of them is right, 1 prefer to be led by logic and suggest that all are most probably wrong; but, the point is, Kohler, reality really doesn’t give a shit; the truth plainly doesn’t matter a damn. And all that matters to me at the moment is that that fool girl has ceased her caterwauling and that I must go in, I’ve begun to chatter like a squirrel, for whom it’s spring, too; have you seen them scampering about with leaves in their mouths? leaves.
   I decided I would go to the Alois that night and hear Susu sing. I was guarding my borders, but Tabor’s tremors crossed illegally. I needed smoke and noise and drink to offset the picture of health the world was presenting. It’s in the pink, I said to Tabor, gesturing broadly with the arm he wasn’t using as a cane. His cackle was clear for a change. And I am in the purple, he said in a triumphant tone. I am not yet in the black. 1 shall live until tomorrow. Tonight, I thought, I shall watch Susu’s nipples harden on her thin flat chest. And she shall sing: My lover lies under me, under the earth. She’ll waver in the haze like heat. Her pelvis will sway slightly. My rock-a-bye baby is quite out of breath. He came with me, came with me, under the earth. Susu would slowly unclasp her hands and they would float slowly upward, trailing their arms, until they were high above her head. Bye-bye my baby, a rock marks your death, so for all future loving you should just save your breath.
   Now I cannot help but envision him sick and shaking even during those earlier days when he was lean and elastic and would snap smartly in your face. It’s funny, because, in the later stages of his disease, I would superimpose the vigorous Tabor over the quivering reed. My immediate perceptions wouldn’t let him change, fall back from his best, while my memory tends to count only the last card played and reads only what was worst in the wasted features of his face.
             Mad Meg
   He entered, his hands already clasped behind his back, and when he began to speak it was not from the rostrum, but from a corner of the hall by a window, quietly, unceremoniously, his attention given utterly to the five or ten who happened to be nearest him. Then as he talked he moved, almost idly, always
slowly, concentrating first on this group, then that, so that by degrees he had reached, touched, captured every man in that crowded hall. The study of history, gentlemen, he said, smiling sadly as he broke the news, the study of history is not the study of people and events, forces and movements, wars and revolutions, the reigns of kings and princes. Tabor’s gray hair hung about his ears; his baldness glistened like a forest pool. One day they’d say he wore the decade like a diadem. How 1 hate this life 1 never want to leave, he often said to me while turning his chair in slow rocky circles like a dying top. It is not— I am sorry—but it is not the study of the past. How can we study the past? There is nothing—no indeed—there is nothing to study. Tabor really regrets this. But. He shrugs in French. No help for it. Too bad. That’s that. Birth, my boy, he often said—the last ejaculation. And he would sigh and shake his head then, too, and squeeze my arm as though I needed consolation. If I hold a rock, a mineral, a piece of prehistoric time in my palm—where, in what age, is the soft plain ... he peers quizzically ... the soft plain, he murmurs, his voice subsiding like a water jet shut slowly down . . . the soft white plain, he coos, the soft white plain of my hand? Tabor’s old. He’s history. The arm he extends toward us begins to tremble. What is wearied by the weight of this stone? he asks; but we know that everywhere his flesh hangs badly on his bones. This stone, he says quietly, after a long pause, this stone is in the present; my palm here, too, is in the present; and 1 am here PRESENT! before you. Tabor’s shouts were always calculated, but as often as I heard him and as well as I got to know his style, 1 was never really ready for them. He was master of the sudden shift: of tone, of mood, of speed or pitch, the quality of language, falling in a blink from Geist to Scheiss like one of the exiled angels. He would bully and hector us; he would cajole. He would scream and swear and throw himself about. No one snoozed when Mad Meg lectured. He rolled his bulbous Socratic eyes. They found and they fastened on every one of us, so that we felt he had noted our always special presence, registered the fact of our particular existence: you, his eyes said, you, I see you there listening, filling the hall with your attention; and though he was small and crippled and pale and tattered, he seemed, on the platform, both powerful and dangerous—liquid—delicate and frail as nitroglycerine, as if he might crack open at any moment and release the visions within him to rush upon us—every nightmarish thing—cover us with what was coming; for it really was the future, the future he seemed full of, although the present tense of history was his favorite theme. At first you weren’t aware of what it led to. He would say, The track of the deer by the river allows us to dream of a deer, to conceive, to infer him. The deer drinks, and there is an image of his antlers in the stream. But our deer is mere conjecture, mere footprint, mere implication, until we shoot him; he is a wraith made of mind, less real than the water he colors with his face. The hall was full. There were hun-
dreds—crowds in the doorways. We have no choice, he'd say. The study of history must be the study of documents and records, of recipes and regulations so to speak, of laws and lists, speeches and plays, paintings and maps ... of remains—whatever remains. Perception, Tabor tells me, and his finger bores a hole in the air, perception is a form of inference along a line of causes. That sexual look. The occasion is less public than a lecture, or at least less ceremonious, since I do recall we were at a party and Tabor was shouting at me across a cold buffet. The wine rolled in his glass. There’s no difference—in principle—between—what the eye does ... 1 remember Tabor rounding toward me, the corner of a napkin crooked in his collar and hanging like a bib beneath his chin. The eye—when it translates its stimulations into cloth, chairs, silver, cookies, glass, plate, tables—or the nose—the nose when it scents the sausage—they all take effect for cause . . . Tabor has sailed in close. His small head leans against my chest as I back off. They see—they sniff—not themselves, eh? not the delighted dance of cells, eh? but the caumff. . . And I think, hearing him shouting a sort of Schopenhauer, pushing caviar into his mouth on rafts of toast and butting me in the bargain, that he’s insane, a madman; yes, that he’s Mad Meg, and his insanity is infecting me. Kohler, he crtes . . . Canapes line his hand like a tray, are stacked on his wrist. I have this disease, he tells us. It has entered me, entered my veins. He is pacing the platform. But, gentlemen, it is the present position of the bacilli that matters, not the door through which they’ve entered. (I believe I have rendered the construction of the phrase.) A cracker shatters. Genius is a faculty some have for seeing—I have extraordinary seeing—I see distinctly through these little holes which drain the present to the past—darkness circles my sight like a leg in a bandage—to the life that’s burning at the bottom here—coin at the end of the tunnel. He smears pate on my vest, loudly curses France in the name of Germany, and from the middle of all eyes winks his own eye saucily. This disease . . . this dis-ease ... he would insist on saying. I am entered like a woman. It has violated me. We wriggled with embarrassment and gave up any attempt to follow. Soon, we knew, the weather would change, Tabor would become his subject, and the sick shabby little man before us would vanish like an elf or fairy, his thin tones would round and come at us like shot from a cannon, there’d be glorious strife and destruction again, and we would stamp our feet and pound our books to convey our approval, our appreciation—I as loudly as any—before rushing from the hall for a drink—a sentimental song, too, I’m afraid—at the end of his harangue, at the end of our applause.
  The applause for Susu was urgent too. It rushed from one end of the low room to the other as though trapped, and would pour out the door and spill like smoke up the stairs into the street. Susu would seem to flutter in it. She would turn her side to it to seem thinner and to offer the least resistance. The simple
sheath she wore hid nothing for there was nothing but her bumps. Sexless, she was sex itself, and the homophile bullies who hung out at Alois hoping for a feel-up in the crowd, a blow job in the john, and more blows in the alley, they loved her as much as anyone. They thumped their mugs; their grins grew evil like the mouth of a moray; they grinned as they took her in.
             Mad Meg
   Before beer, an oration. There are other remains, gentlemen, more or less human ones: walls and pots and colored images and bones. I remember. There is history. There is history remembered. Which is history too, the second time around. My mother’s powdered forehead, for instance. Tabor chews fiercely. Stars, he exclaims, gazing up. And now we begin an old game, though 1 am weary of playing it. Weary of weeding in the hot sun. Weary of sitting alone, silent, nearly asleep on the cheeks of my book. Weary of starting cars on cold mornings. Weary of jolly enjoyments: teaseless undergarments, bedspreads, fraufat. On that afternoon I was weary. I abandoned the cucumber sandwiches, the salmon and the mayonnaise, while Tabor’s gestures removed the ceiling. The moon is down. The second time around. The night sky sparkles like black champagne. All these dots, he exclaims, exchanging his empty glass for a full one and advancing on me like a multitude of people; like a multitude of people, he exclaims, all these dots have a different age. As my memories have . . . and my book’s pages. My life jerks through me like an old-time movie (in fits and Sennetts, Culp inserts, his palm contriving Indian hoots). A sliver of lobster slides away. On this afternoon I am weary. Sunning through the blinds and shuttering the bed, she was striped like a zebra. I remember a run of light across your breast, Lou—the Venetian sensations you gave me. Human history. My mother sits beside a cup of cold tomato soup and bleeds her period onto the back step. Suppose, Kohler, there were—there were such an historian, and all the events of history lay before him, to be seen as scenery—in a form— like stars—and time was sky. We were at a party, in a planetarium, in a chancellery, in Mad Meg's head, in a dream, in a trance, in a spell, in a daze. He’s gestured away the ceiling. How I hate this life, like Tabor, I never want to leave. 1 am weary now of empty amusements, of heavy overcoats, of cigarettes and study. The passage of the years, like a train through a tunnel, only dirties the cars. And I am weary of dinner tables and dinner table prattle and the whole of life in chairs, in families, in national places. An oration, oration. Tabor rolls
wine in his mouth. You can feel the fizz in your nose. Brandy burns in crystal decanters. An oration. Before beer—an oration. Dark sleeves like tornadoes suck up sausages and ham. I see them clearly, Kohler—oh, my corny Iowa Yankee—there: the ranges of history, spread out before me like a welcoming woman—like this buffet table with its clamorous platters . . . their amorous cuisine. The geography of heaven, don’t you see? the geography of man. It’s beautifully proportional. Tabor swallows his fingers—alternately—and returns to his feed. I'm let off, reprieved. No more lessons in astronomy today. But his voice can come from anywhere like a wind. The study of history is essentially the study of symbols and markers, of verbal remains—symbol middens, shall we say?—and tombs. Our study, gentlemen, the study of history, is really a study of language. Only words speak past the present; only words have any kind of honest constant visual life. These voices shine their distance like the constellations. Young Alcibiades. The beautiful. Or the words for Caesar’s wounds. His hands fondle a cigar clipper, a pen, a pink eraser like a piece of lip. You are pinned to his lapel, rosetted there. He spirals, pendulums. Yet there are so many signs ... so many. What words, whose words, should we study and love? The hall was full. There were hundreds. There were crowds in the doorways—everyone still. Flags like trumpeting flowers lined the aisles in stiff stands. Functionaries, all in uniforms and medals, formal trousers, leather cases, sat fatly in the first rows. Tabor’s hair concealed the puddle in it, he tossed his head so. No one shuffled. Tabor gazed at distant windows—incautious birds.
   Pale Alcibiades, my boy, says Meg, winking lewdly: penis in the hand of Socrates. His desk was leafed with paper like the floor of a forest.
                   I, Thucydides, an Athenian, made this war to be, and I conceived it to be a great one, that I should be esteemed, honored, and forever studied: my battles, heroes, speeches, and my mind.
Tabor squeals with delight as he twirls in his chair, the chair I teeter in now so quietly. Kohler, he says, grabbing my coated arm, ideas—ideas are exciting to me. They make me want to take them in my mouth.
   In my trunk I have a cartoon—the newspaper brittle and yellow now—of the scurrilous anti-Semitic sort I so love to collect. The upper legs and lower belly of a prone and naked male are shown. There, a thick and circumcised cock rises out of an ugly crosshatch of hair. Around the cock, however, is wrapped a
fist, thrust—one feels forcefully—from the sleeve of a uniformed arm coming toward one like a blow in the shadowy background. Although the fat fingers of the fist cover most of the cock, its Semitic circumcision and -glistening head are clearly shown, if rather crudely drawn. Adorning a middle finger of the fist is a large ring with a round face on which a swastika has been boldly incised in heavy ink. The original was in simple black and white, of course. I colored the cock's head red with crayon later, and made the ring as yellow as a winter squash. It is an arresting image.
             Mad Meg
   What an in-cred-ible question, Mad Meg shouted. Who makes our history for us? Do we? do we make our history, turn it out on some machine? Of course not. Vainglorious rubbish. Childish twaddle. It is Tacitus who does it. Livy. It’s Thucydides. Historians make history. Agricola’s story has been told to posterity, Meg declaims, and by that he will live. Who poisoned this paragon, Agricola? Domitian? Ha. No. Rubbish. His creator, Tacitus, with sly suggestion. Meg stalked back and forth like a raven. Between the flags men were sitting, holding their knees. Eagles gleamed on the peaks of the standards. Wretched men in wretched cities, Mad Meg said, stupid combats, needless suffering, regardless death: did they compile that war on the Peloponnesus? The war is Thucydides, I tell you. He waged it when he wrote. And if it were a fiction, if we found it thick with lies tomorrow like bad beef, it still would be our past, the past we’ve lived—unaltered. That cruel fools’ war has changed us—I mean the man who, with it, made our memories, he changed us, for when he writes, we feel before we see.
   I never saw Magus Tabor undertake an ordinary task. Perhaps he had no daily life at all but bounced from note to note in that eternal song of his like the little dot which directed our singing in the movie houses of the thirties. When those black balls reached the end of a line, I recall, they marked time by bobbing, as though afloat on nervous bladders, rapidly, straight up and down. He walked in the park while he could; he wrote; he read; he talked; he was consoled by women provided for him by his secretary—a man Tabor rarely spoke to and toward whom he displayed an almost absolute contempt; he attended few parties; he was ushered into important chambers; he cursed a lot, with a heat exceeding his invention. Whatever feelings he provoked were always strong. Meg had no delicacy at all. He was certainly far from being hof-
fahig. When he had a cold, for instance, he let his nose run without caring. Crumbs clung insecurely to his mouth. Occasionally he dragged a garter. Wax affected his hearing, and vocal indistinctness made him angry. He yanked on your tie as he yanked on his own, and he pulled at sleeve or sweater ravelings in a fury. Still there must have been some time when he brushed his teeth or put on clothes, though his clothes looked slept in, and his teeth were faintly green like a blooming pond. He would ask you any question whose answer he wanted to have—and no other kind—regardless of the indiscretions these demanded, or your embarrassment; and if your reply was hesitant, stiff, evasive, slow, unimaginative, forceless, dull, or uninformed, he would interrupt by shouting shit,’ a word wrapped often with his spit and delivered in a spray point-blank, as though he were a member of a boarding party, whereupon he’d spin his back to you and glare at his row of Goethe, the volume numbers large and gold—in Gothic. Why he bothered with me I cannot imagine, 1 was so small an audience—not even, I suspect, a very good one. He stirred me—yes. My deepest layers rose, and my consciousness became clouded with dregs which have never settled This, perhaps, was it—this cloudiness—for he shattered his surroundings and left you to restore his ruins when he left; yet you could seldom quite do it, and the old world you’d known was gone, the new one displaced from it—rearranged, repeopled—as if instead of pipes and persons, chairs and tables, ideas were being smoked or sat on, and emotions wore tuxedos. There in the hall that morning it was hot; the sky outside was threatening, and we sank like spent swimmers, everything and everyone but Magus Tabor at an utter stop. Medals smeared the chests of the dignitaries. Moment by moment their clothing seemed less soldierly. Faces were alternately pink and pale, even the smallest mustaches looked worried, while heads made helmets of their hair. Was it sweat which was salting their eyes? Who wore thick glasses? Feet sat like good dogs, firmly floored, and the good soldiers kept their noses reverently elevated. I wonder, really, just how much they heard, or just how much they understood. Their military grays were gluey, boot leather darkly slickered as for rain. The bodies of the pigeons deepened as Tabor talked.
   What is a wound we’ve suffered in a war, an arm that’s been fiercely slendered from us, but a sight for gawkers on the city square, the minutest memorial? We are a sleeveless veteran of events which subsequent days have dried without a trace—drawn up the sunshine into air. How can we return that severed member to our shoulder, have it circle a waist or hold a sword once more? We cannot shout, Arm! . . . arm! . . . and make it flesh again. Instead, with tales of hand-to-hand, we hold the ears of children. Some—for what time?— may remember them. But they will dwindle too, and disappear, the children and their memories, as all our feelings . . . daily.
   There was nothing but the gray sun we were boiling in and Mad Meg's childish prance . . .
   When we think of history, we think of a chain of causes, don’t we? long lines of barges pulled along by God. We’ve simple minds. Events in nature, in our lives, have little power; they are, at most, like rockets dimming even as they flame ... to shatter insubstantially against an insubstantial darkness. Certainly we d like to think that our stubbed toe or ulcerous belly makes a painful claim on the world’s body. We’ve simple prides. The fire show’s inconsequential, but what of our awareness? what burns in us as it burns? We never come alight. Our pictures die as quietly as grass is. Oh, consciousness as consciousness . . . it’s entirely superfluous, a victim of entropy—the pain of an entire people will not fill a pillow. So to the world which no one’s mind is in: goodbye.
   Goodbye, dear Lou. We’ve loved. 1 suppose that is enough. There is so little here to care for that I cry over kittens, smothered by the sacks they’re born in. You left me for your life, a treachery so natural and right I’ve no response but howling, cries without plan or purpose. The wind might have made them. Lou. Your name is all I have now.
   If I am lonely because I do not like the world, why should 1 let it in, then, to run around in my head like a troop of loud kids and trouble me? nosirree, I dig; I go down into the depths of myself and fool around in hidden holes and cart dirt away secretly; I’ve got the big stones moved and I’ve picked a few feet of earth loose, and begun to workout a strategy; my god, the complications of the lonely life; and maybe that was why Mad Meg clung to my arm, even though he talked to me most of the time as if I were another hall of students; still, I think he had his hopes, not that I would change the state of his soul, but that I would help him hide it from himself, hide the hollow where his words were, the words which expressed over and over his despair, for I realize, now that I’ve begun to doodle the designs, that Magus Tabor will always be the spiritual founder of the Party of the Disappointed People.
THE STRUCTURE OF
A PdP PARTICLE
267
Cloth cap
Orange for outrage
/\
Green for envy
PdP for the Party of the Disappointed People
             Mad Meg
   Words, however, gentlemen, WORDS! words do more than fly from their tails, burning like the peacock. The words 1 mean were meant for grander sounds than the groans of the stoically wounded, for half-whole fathers by their fires—to warm the children’s bedtime toddy. I mean those words which, when beautifully contrived and drawn together by an Angelo, stain the sky they're shouted at, outshining any sunset. And when we put our thoughts together well, men think well of us; when our speech is passionate, they feel strongly; when our vision has become entirely verbal, it will be as if we’d lifted covers from the blind; they’ll canary in their cages, and there’ll be daytime always. In defiance of nature and every law, night will die neglected. Words, then, gentlemen—not in Mother's homesweet mottoes, but in the miseries of history— those that go like loneliness through the soul: these are the words 1 mean.
   And 1 wished for an interruption, a catastophe, a cave-in under our seats; I wished all those cool cellars where barrels of beer were stored would open their mouths and quaff us until we were quenched.
   Think of the safety a word sets before us. Does the word prick’ stick us? what bumps when ’bump’ is spoken? is there any blood in ‘bleed’? And they are just a beginning. We’ve plain desires, but complicated cookery. Men look at them—these words—and see . . . salvation. Soon then, so beautiful they seem, so full of peace and promise—whatever their subject; upon our sentences stand others nearly as lovely; we take an almost holy office from their Being, and in this heedless way, continue into commentary. Thus the thief consoles his paid-for dinner with a pilfered fork. There’s no end to this ludicrous folly. Accounts again are rendered; thought takes thought, not things, for substance; language replaces life; history usurps the past, and we make sounds about sounds without limit; we steeple up a church to worship all the names we’ve given Time.
   Mad Meg. His hot hall held us like a thermos.
   . . . un mot meilleur, et meilleur que meilleur . . .
   So you seek safety in your sentences? Well, they seem safe, safe as sofas. Safe as sticks before they detonate. For if some smooth Bible-shitter mistranslates his text, for instance, sick from what he’s eaten maybe, drunk, malicious, who knows? does it matter? can we care? he may alter history for a thousand years—hence for a thousand thousand—hence forever. My good
German gentlemen, consider. This false text, this shabby botch, this piece of presumptuous incompetence, this snot from a Jew’s nose, this, and not the "True” text—this is what we worship, found our church on; it’s the wind we use to pump up our philosophy; it’s the banner we go to war with; it’s the lance with which we run a million through, and in whose name—isn’t it?—as simple servants of the Lord—aren’t we?—for the general welfare and the greatest happiness—don’t we cheat and lie and steal and jail and shoot and hang, electrocute, and break and smash and burn, confine, and rape and flay, interrogate, and blind and wound and murder, bomb and cannon, confiscate? It’s not the pen that’s mightier than the sword. It’s not the ink or printing press or sudden plenitude of paper, but the spiritual system which these invoke, as patricide once figured forth the Furies—concepts, gentlemen, Plato’s pitiless angels, the featureless Forms; so that now even a dense dry cold book—Das Kapital—can consume a city. Whole families, countless generations, can be impaled upon a verb—fried, boiled, quartered by the Word ... the word which was with God from the beginning.
   Silence fell from his slowly tipped-over hands. 1 thought 1 would do sums to keep my sanity, like men long in solitary.
   Myths . . . Myths grown fat and syphilitic . . . Myths are history, and myths are made, preserved, and propagated in some language. Now then, my pure, young, decent countrymen: whose tongue shall be the one to wag?
   Tabor took hold of his tongue with his fingers and pulled it roughly through his mouth. Just listen to me, would you. What am 1 saying? What is fake or false about a tidal wave? 1 denounce one text to turd you with another. Mine, 1 say— ours, we cry—is the true text. Heedle-deedle-da. What is this Truth we so freely prattle of—whose coming will cure plagues, throw extra walls around beleaguered cities, turn the spear’s bite into a tummy tickle? Ffonestly now ... my fair-haired, blue-eyed gentlemen and hope of Germany—we do not care, will not give a soft stool for the august verities if what we believe is convenient; if it dashes our enemies to the ground; if it makes us rich; if it fends off our fears; puts us in bed with women, kicks others out, and deprives them of the pleasures which, from some inadequacy, we cannot share. What trivial nonsense truths are, how false in fact their elevation. It’s a mere name, yes, a flattering designation, a title like Right Reverend, the Flonorable, or Most High (any baron’s is better), a pure canard, this Truth; it's Descartes’ deceitful demon set in his cups to dream a doubting I—yes—it is a cacofogo’s gloat then, just one more tasteless jape of Nature, or, if you like, the last itty-bitty fib of God.
   Tabor grins, claps his hands, applauds. Nevertheless, he says, more than Tnsmegistus, he declares, more than Cagliostro, he insists, it’s both the magic and the magician.
   You shall listen. I shall tell you. It’s a war of lie against lie in this world where we are, fancy against fantasy, nightmare throttling nightmare like two wedded anacondas, and anyone who’s taken in is nothing but a bolo and a bumpkin. But that’s just exactly what we all are—hoddydoddies—aren’t we? Aren’t we all so hungry, anxious, eager, to believe? like men in prison, aren’t we skinny to be screwed? and don’t we think that we’ve escaped to freedom when we drink our wits out, dance our reason loose, and crack our nuts between the fat legs of some four-mark whore?
   Nothing in the manner of the time prepared you for Mad Meg’s little obscenities, but going to his classes was like going to a circus or a carnival, a brothel even; certain standards were suspended for the visit. He was unreal, something to be stared at from a distance, something happening in quite another space, just as the space of cages, where monkeys calmly fondle themselves, seems removed by even more than species from ourselves. Meg was an aborigine on display, and you lined up to see him. But if we did not take him seriously, weren't we moved? He was bottled in his lecture hall, a specimen, or kept there like a creature in the zoo, and it was precisely this which allowed him to reach us. When the panther can’t pursue and take us, and we’re safe behind his lines, when even his eyes are painless, and
                Sein blick is vom Vorubergehn der Stabe so mild geworden, dass er nichts mehr halt,
then we can begin to admire his strength, his lazy grace, and lose ourselves in his beauty. Well, there was nothing exactly beautiful about Magus Tabor; he had no grace; but he did have uniqueness; he was one of a kind, and you felt the authorities, like scientists, were studying him too. So Tabor was not a dangerous explosive as he liked to hint, though that is indeed what he passed for. He was merely a fuse. While the sky outside collected its energy, inside, Mad Meg loosed the storm.
   You all want fine degrees to dangle between your legs, gentlemen, don’t you? Desirable. Correct. But proof of what virility when this fresh phallus sprouts from your head like a sniffly nose? In any case, it isn’t reason that’s the slut; it is not learning. It’s the Truth this learning lusts for that's the royal pig; and we are pulled behind our skull’s cock like a carriage—powerless without it, we mistakenly think, to reach a destination.
   Wahr-heit, he’d say, coming down disdainfully on the final t. On any journey, she’s a cold, infested inn with fine signs. Dich-tung und Waahr-heit. Which one’s the man and which the wife? Ah, she’s an easeful prostitute, this handsome doss we long to lie our minds with, for she will bed-bite, infect us with a slow and deadly sickness. What a price—to have a climax like the mayfly’s.
   1 knew that the last weeks of Tabor’s life were his last weeks when Tabor fell silent. The phrase, in this case, was not a cliche. 1 saw him fall. And his eyes would fix on some nothing beside me and seem to glaze. One hand on my arm, he would suddenly peer into emptiness like Rilke’s panther, the hand gripping me as if he wanted to take me along. I can’t see the past, he told me. I’m blind. When he did speak he spoke slowly, mechanically, wearily turning a crank. My one -ruth, he said, I -un -uth. Hissreee -ass -ree -ages, -ree. And very slowly he would pull one finger away from the rest, and then another, until he held three. A chancre, 1 made out he said, a sore, the source of the event. This was followed by a pause, a false calm. Then that sore or irritation would breakout everywhere. Quibbles, quarrels, strikes, riots. This second stage was divided from the third as the first was: by an interval of peace. Then the disturbance which had been on the surface would sink inside the situation, and the nation would begin to come apart from within. And I would watch him shake and his eyes dim. That extraordinary seeing was gone.
   You shall listen a little longer. My unravelings reach their end. What I’ve said to you today, and every day so often through the year, is very obvious, very plain, very easy, very simple and straightforward, very clear. Gentlemen: now I close. If the study of history is the study of language in one form or another, and if we really fabricate our past, not merely—weakly—live it; then we can begin to see how the world was Greek once, or was Roman, since every page of consciousness was written in these tongues then. All the central documents—laws, plays, poems, reports, abiding wisdoms, letters, scientific learning, news— were couched in Greek or Latin phrases, and the chief historians consulted them, composed their chronicles from the same speech, in the same words. Don’t you see that when a man writes the history of your country in another mother-language, he is bent on conquest? If he succeeds, he will have replaced your past, and all your methods of communication, your habits of thinking, feeling, and perceiving, your very way of being, with his own. His history will be yours, perforce. Per-force! I say make others-—why be made? 1 say that we, after adolescent stresses natural to growth, and now arriving finally at our militant majority, should accede—we should invade! capture the Kingdom, take our rightful place, recompose the world in our, not someone else's, image, and impose our way of seeing on the rest of this poor aged blindness men call Europe. And what is Europe for us? a beginning! Our hemisphere’s been Hel-lenized, Romanized, and wrapped in Christianity like a shroud. We wait—wait—wait—wait—wait—wait. Tabor kept the cadence with his fist. When will our turn come? Gentlemen, our circle has squared. Our turn is here. Thus set, we lean into the mark, and we must leap with all our energy and learning toward the tape. Conquest via history is the only kind with any permanence. But we must, to succeed, believe in ourselves, believe we are magnets, centers, sources. Then all shall be drawn to us. Why? How can we
do this? We can do this because we have a dream round our head like a halo, a crown. It is the dream of all men: to re-create Time. Don’t you feel it? It's like a cloud—those dark thunderheads outside—clouds zebra’d with lightning. To call the cuckoos from their clocks, halt heaven with an upraised palm, hold the sun from its horizon: only we can do it!
   Oh, gentlemen, it has been Sunday in our country far too long.
   Am deutschen Wesen soil die Welt genesen!
   The students were murmuring, stirring in their seats. I saw several in tears. Meg regained silence with outstretched sleeves.
   Could any history of Western Europe, written in Romanian, become a classic? The dying states, the Spains, can they produce it? or the little and the lost—Albanias or Belgiums?—the chronic losers—Polands—can they call up the necessary visions? Nor can the parasites of war, the Swiss or Swedes, who always feed in safety (for they’ve no gumption in them, no divinity), lift their weight up the steps toward empire. To undertake such a task, let alone succeed in it, requires in the historian a sense for the inevitable destiny of his people and the importance, in furthering their aims, of dominating, assimilating, altering everything, of replacing the customs of the nations to be conquered with the folkways and traditions, the laws and literature, the confident future of your own. Enlist yourselves in this army. Give up small loves and local loyalties for this; sign your fortunes over to it, never waver; in the face of every enemy persist; and then I promise you, young gentlemen, that the future—the future shall speak only German!
            GERMAN     GERMAN      GERMAN      GERMAN
came the reply, the shout—the students standing in their chairs.
            GERMAN     GERMAN      GERMAN      GERMAN
The dignitaries rose and faced us in a line. GERMAN, they cried. GERMAN! was our antiphonal response. GERMAN. . . GERMAN! GERMAN. . .GERMAN! Magus Tabor had disappeared—he had not engineered this demonstration for himself—but it was a long time, and a few seats were broken, before we filed out and struggled through the raining streets to soothe our tired throats with beer.
              At Death’s Door
   His eyes seemed unnaturally bright, as if there were no other stars.
   I suppose I had expected the standard—that is, the sterilized—hospital room, empty of everything except the equipment of death, perhaps a few use-
less flowers, lots of white to flatter the patient’s pallor by aping it. Certainly Meg was shivering in the center of a wide expanse of sheet, but otherwise the walls were brick, the courses gray from the years they'd been about their business, the single window small, with an almost waxy pane, so that from where I stood in the open door its view of the world was smeared. The sill’s paint had peeled without a beach’s bum, and the uneven stone floor felt more like one a medieval castle might put beneath your feet, cold too, though it was summer and otherwise warm in the town.
   Oddly off center, a solitary bulb, inadequately shielded by a green metal cone, hung from the ceiling at the end of a thick, black rubber-covered wire, and when you pulled its beaded chrome chain, the lamp’s green shade bobbed.
   I had not been summoned, so I appeared in "death’s door” with some trepidation. One glance told me that Mad Meg would be mad no more. Or rather, it would now be his body which would behave crazily, allowing his soul to lie still as a stage on which others trod. The air smelled slow as smoke.
   I did not understand, then, what it meant to be brought down by your own bones, though I had certainly observed the steps made by last legs, dragged against their will into making another move. I naively thought of it as learning to walk once more, as though babyhood had been born again, but I know now that what I was seeing was the breaking of a skill not its unmaking, the losing of a learning like one who loses love. There is no second childhood sitting like a bench beside the grave.
   Mad Meg wasn't to die in midcry, amid the consternations of his concepts, full of his own vinegar and other people’s piss. He would die in his shroud, chilled to the skin, and consequently cold beyond mere touch, a cold which began within the soul and froze its slow way out.
   As he himself said, or tried to say, when you die this way you die bit by bit, death's rattle is continuous: first, perhaps, as a slight cough squatting in the lower lungs, or a dryness which makes the skin rough, a burning in your urine as though it had been heated on the stove, accounting for the burble in the kidneys, but then, maybe, it sounds the knell of alertness as the eyes fade from things like evening light and distraction sits in the center of sensation like a turd on the dining table; or it’s your grip, and you can’t make a fist, your nails lose their luster, your speech its zip, you cannot easily wet your lip, or see your shoe where it’s slipped beneath the bed, and when you slide to its edge the floor is so far away, as is every feature of a familiar face or the taste of food in bowls you have to holler at to see, while tingles try themselves out along your legs which you haven’t flexed sufficiently today though you were told to by the orderly, because you were attending a funeral for your fist (the ceremony seemed a bit hurried this time), and were at that point in the rite where you were expected to say something fitting about those formerly serviceable fingers
and the ball, better than twine, they could close into, except the throat had become rough the way a road is worn by the heaviness of its traffic, and appeared ready to match the other humiliations of your illness with insufficiencies of its own—so soreness spreads in the sheets which have made it until you have no real skin beyond this unpleasantly encompassing sensation, and even your ability to have a rest, a good snooze at least, is gone, though you haven’t the strength to toss and turn, and then you begin to pass in and out of yourself like a fly in a room—that's the buzz your ears hear as they try to shut down—hence you hunger for silence like a piece of cheese to soften in your mouth, though nothing any longer has a name, neither parmesan on the pasta, nor swiss in the trap, nor brie on the bread, nor cheddar melted over meat, nor chunks of feta among the greens; moreover, you really haven't any hunger—eating is the hospital’s habit—you haven’t any needs but the need to be released, drawn into your illness like an arrow in a bow—and then you know you are a goner—okay go, you say, let’s go—but the going still goes on like the slow drip of a tap, your nose, your catheter, IV—an abbrev which sounds like someone crying out in pain—IV IV IV—or maybe you are hooked up to other items of instrumentation, so the departure of your life reads like tables for the train, tides for which the ferry delays: when will the waters rise? when will your local leave? but you are condemned to remain; they shall find you stiffened in your seat in the waiting room, bag by your foot where your vials were stored, right hand open on your knee where it was trying to make a fist when you snapped like the snapping of a pencil lead, always all of a sudden—damn.
   I did not know what you did in front of death, what you said to the dying, how you conveyed concern, whether you could be any kind of comfort, because those who had so far died in my life had died out of sight, behind—it seemed—dozens of doors, and I had simply sat in a rolling car and then on a folding chair till it was over. When somebody said: 'go play.”
   Nor had I read about it much during my growing up, as many adolescents did, nor let my head entertain seductive thoughts of the Beyond, flirting with what seemed so remote, so romantic, so unreal, there was nothing to fear, little chance my winks would be misunderstood, my smiles lead to a mistake; that I’d be asked for a date and have to hold a bony hand during the last dance, listen to the bones shake as I was doing now that Magus Tabor had turned into his palsy, and not another symptom showed but the paleness of the blur his body made, quivering constantly and uncontrollably, fluttering where it was loosely wrapped, the white sheet—all he had to hide in—like a sail so battered by the wind 1 heard the cloth snap.
   Yes, the eyes were alive, the eyes of a bad storm, and 1 tried to fix on them as they were fixed on me, but naturally their gaze had to seem accusing—who knew
what dared to enter them and stand before their bar?—guilty because I was well-1 was sturdy and upright, imbecile as always in his presence, on the brink of uttering inanities so complete as to bring a smile to the surface of his shivering, delight to his dingy demise—as he might have described it—nevertheless he seemed uneasy, skidding like a spoon across a greasy plate, and 1 was eyed apprehensively, as an insect might eye the approach of my foot, while I stood there in the door and almost said, “Hi . . “Well . . “I’ve brought you ..." “Thought you might like . . .’’ “Any better . . “It’s nice out today, not so warm . . .”
   He could no longer form words; the air which reached his cheeks was in total turmoil and emerged in burbles between what were thin wiggling, wormlike lips, his teeth having been removed long since, and for many reasons, one that he was biting himself, and his tongue became too wounded to say “scream. ’ Words were Magus Tabor’s reason for being; breath was merely their carrier, their contrivance; soul was essentially the source of one's X.070S, as it had been for the Greeks; consequently this illness shook more than his body when it troubled his larynx, wobbled his loose and emptied jaw, plucked at his palate; so that siss boom bah, had he said it, would have seemed profound, the final accomplishment of history's poet, and an instance of poetic irony too: to have the soul go off in a raucous cheer, whistling away from both steam and kettle, the ghost in the machine gone from between every run-down cam and lever where it used to lurk, escaping each murderous movement by means of irrelevance, but now irrelevant even to its own exertions. It was not as if, having lost his arms, he could still type with his toes. He had lost every medium for the spirits expression—all but his wary, unwavering eyes.
   The sorrow I felt, the loss I was realizing, was not for a life, of course, since Magus Tabor was technically still alive, but for that extraordinary consciousness which, principally, his speech was able to convey to me, as well as to hallfuls of others: how else would we have known what paced back and forth in Mad Meg’s head except from his talk, his lectures, his letters and books— those throatier roars? It’s true his body had been a burning bush, but it had burned with his message, his manner, his method, each wholly his, in the tone, taste, type, in the hiss and bite and venom of it, that made his utterance like a snake’s strike, or as he so often said with typical extravagance: I AM MY HIM; listen to my four-square tunes, and be the same. Yankee, are you? revolutionary? then be your own tea, Kohler, pour yourself in the bay so Boston may sip you and be stimulated. That was when 1 hoped to return to Harvard, and he was full of ridiculous quips about my future; how I should plan, what I should achieve. Well, whatever it was, I hoped not to end like this, in this last sadness, for I was sobered to the soul to know what the magic man had come to, how fate had finally betrayed him, denied him not only a hero's death, but, in a way,
any death at all, any dignity in his old age, any reverence, any, even, farewell from friends.
   Nevertheless, whatever posterity might say, the fact was that Tabor had no friends, and that 1 had not been bidden to his doomsday doorway as if 1 were one. I had come on my own account to pay my last respects to what was left of the composer of history’s hymnal, the singer of history’s lays. What was left to respect proved to be his accusatory eyes. Which roved when 1 did.
   1 had actually come to say goodbye in a sincere and simple way, if 1 could find one. But I could not wish good luck or bid Godspeed—hey, 1 hope you get to heaven, I think you've got a chance, I really do—and 1 could not utter the cliches which embarrassment sent to my lips; in fact, l could not say anything to someone unable or forbidden to reply, who could only tremble as if in fear, cower under the covers in shame of his situation, with his eyes glowing like an animal caught in a cave, alone, the last of his species, no longer enraged and ready to retaliate, no longer even brave.
   Could 1 hold out my hand and hope to sync its shaking with his? could 1 break off a smile like a crust of beggar’s bread? speak my mind? die quickly, my friend, let’s get to death without the dance. There was no way to say: you leave one pupil, Professor, among all of those who flocked (yes, like sheep) to hear you, who gave you their one minute of admiration at the end of every holy hour; from them you earned, possibly gained, certainly obtained a single disciple; and you will die now—we both hope, soon—before your solitary follower can disallow you, before he can go back on your word, and besmirch your reputation with the tarnish which will surely darken his own. There is some strange justice in all this. That blot upon his honor, furthermore, will be your gift to him: a set of disturbingly honest and repulsively accurate ideas. For these, he comes to your deathbed now to thank you—for simultaneously giving value to, and ruining, his life.
   I stood beneath the green shade, soaking up its light, and leaking shadow in a puddle’s shape. The nun who had accompanied me, who opened the door and said, “this way,” had disappeared, as if by means of her strangely winged hat. I thought this was an odd place for a Professor to be, especially one whose gods all came from the Nibelungenleid, although I remembered that Santayana had hung out in a nunnery at the end. Surely Meg had not recanted his views, or had his beliefs as shaken as his body was, or taken these symptoms as a sign that, because punishments were to be tailored to their crimes, his sentiments resembled tics and twitches.
   True, muscles jumped; lids flickered; conniptions folded his legs up to his belly only to extend them spastically like a jolted frog; his hair seemed to bend and straighten in an otherwise unfelt wind; his thumbs wagged as if he were
hitching two rides on one road; disfiguring cramps grabbed his face, which increasingly seemed made of rubber, and sometimes I thought his ears wiggled comically and his nostrils flared like a figure pretending passion in a silent movie.
   How exhausting it must be to be so exercised. Laocoon’s serpents were outside him when they twined about his torso. Meg’s were Meg, intestinal to him. And how could Tabor be fed? Food would spew out of his mouth as fast as it was spooned in. His gullet would also disgorge it. Moreover, his head wagged and bobbed like a badly managed marionette. In an instant, tubes would be tugged from their fastenings in his flesh, were they tried. Strapping him down was not feasible, he would fidget in the loops, and even wrapped like a mummy, his interior would cringe and lungs deflate. I decided to appeal to his nurse to sedate the Magus more severely, put him to sleep, overdose him into nevermoreland.
   So he would die as a disturbance. That was probably proper, but it was proper only when put this way, rather than another, which was something Magus Tabor had taught me: wait for the words, he’d say and then you’ll know what is going on; wait for the words, they will betray their occasion without a qualm; wait for the words, when their objects will become real, turn real as a face turns red with the realization they are being said; don’t deal with the unnamed, they are without signification; remember, to be is to be enunciated—said, sung, shouted— to be syllabated; 1 was a word, therefore 1 was; and while I was a word, brief as a breath, held in the head or sustained on paper, prolonged in print, bound as a book, I was like licketty, you understand, like a term on one of the tablets of the gods, like lights made of stars flicked on and off to say: here I am, I’m stage, I’m song, I’m printed on the ticket; so Tabor could die in a thousand descriptions, although each way only once: once as a disturbance, once as a sign from the gods, once as a penalty, once to signify the unfairness of fundamental things, once to be symbolic of his soul’s strife, once to remaind me of what he taught, once to be simply another number in the census of the dead that day, the day— evening, midnight, dawn—he did it—it did it—died.
   The hall would be ababble until that toy door opened and then a hush would fall, expectation took control of us: what would the subject be today? how would he begin? what was his mood? and that was quickly followed by intense attention, for we were ready to follow him anywhere like lost and hungry pups. Today Meg’s mood was distant, undecipherable, hidden by his shakes, but perhaps it was wrong to imagine a mood existing while he was in the grip, one supposed, of such pain, certainly in the center of the embarrassment his body gave him. All right—his body gave me.
   So then, gentlemen, today we do not stand on the edge of tomorrow, as you might imagine, but we stand where we always stand, on the lip of the past, into which our spirits shall enter to become gods, the way Empedocles entered Etna.
   Perhaps I misunderstood the situation. Perhaps he had become his speech, and right now his body was a vocal cord, twanging a brand-new tune and telling the tale of Time in an advanced, experimental way, while 1, inadequate as always, was failing to follow and rendering his efforts useless. My memory was made of old modes. He’d say: it is an ancient dream, a German dream, but do not suppose only Germans have dreams, or that only Germans enter theirs— not at all, all enter—it is just that some dreams resemble their dreamers, and are puerile, paltry, personal, dressed in wet rags, gutter-fed and sewerish, because they are composed of the aspirations of servants; while others resemble the fluffy white and rosy clouds which painters have drawn to signify transcendence, the hole in the heavens through which Christ’s body will pass on its journey to the throne of God. It is a road that we, here and now, replicate with walls of lights, rows of flags, and our own ranks, parting for the passage of our leaders toward our goals.
   Mad Meg maintained that death was History’s only subject, and he returned to it again and again, his rhetoric wrestling with Doom's inherently indefinable lack of character; for death, he said, was vacant as a student’s head, final as an exam, universal as the pox they caught. It was the quicksand into which the whole of thought sank; its finality disposed of every goal, and made every purpose pointless; its generality did the cosmos in, and all the gods.
   I knew 1 should say something, and so I finally did. I said hello. I said I suspected he was surprised to see me. Not enough people knew where he was, 1 said, if they did he would have more visitors. I said I hoped he was being well taken care of. I hoped he could eat. 1 said I did not recognize the order signified by the nun’s habit. I asked one question: did he ever sleep? Of course I regretted opening my mouth, especially because, in order to get anything out, 1 had to pretend to be in a play about Hell and that here was one of the tormented I was scripted, like Dante, to talk to. I said that my work was almost over; that I would be returning to Boston soon (which was a lie because Harvard had not renewed my fellowship); that I admired the New Germany; that my experience in his class had been the most important of my life; that 1 hoped to emulate his dedication, if I could not match his genius; that I felt, as I felt he felt, alone with my unmentionable ideas; that I certainly could not join the political right, it was made of intellectual thugs and drones, nor the left, of course, either, since liberals were humanists at heart and humanists were vain about the value of man, foolish about his co-called higher, better, nature, and hypocrites about their equalitarian causes.
   I told him I hoped never to marry. I hoped to teach as he had the truth no matter what, namely that the truth was a snare. 1 said I hated the Reds; 1 said that my melancholy had brought me to the edge. I wondered who the women
were who were taking care of him. I hoped he could eat. Did he sleep? Were the days long? Was he in pain? Did they change the sheets? Why was the window waxy? The floors seemed clean. Had this building been a schloss? It was time for me to leave. I still had that accent he made fun of. Perhaps he had noticed that. I had ridden out on my bike. Riding was probably good for me. Were they getting him everything he wanted? Did anyone read to him, show him magazines? Would he like a phonograph brought in? Did he ever see the papers? Did he sleep? 1 should let him get some rest. I would never marry. 1 was miserable and afraid to leave. I hated every journey, especially journeys home. Autos made me sick, trains made me giddy. The sheets seemed crisply starched, but were they possibly too stiff? How did he communicate with the nuns? Nuns, 1 said, gave me the creeps. All that black. These women, though, wore white. Was that a comfort—that they resembled ordinary nurses? Did he have a routine? Did his doctor visit him in the mornings? Did he take the same medicines every hour? Why wasn’t there a better light? the door was awfully heavy, more like the door of a cell; had he ever read Henry Adams? Did he still have the same opinion about the Jews?
   Death makes no distinctions, he used to say. It kills us all—man and mineral, plant and animal, alike. It is dying, my friend, who is the snob. Death and dying—what a difference!—they are scarcely on speaking terms. Surely you remember the famous mistake in the Phaedo where, addled by the onset of Socrates’ state—imposed suicide, the participants accept the continuities of living and dying, appreciate their degree-divided characters, their correlativity, only to confuse them then with the finality, the absoluteness, the over-the-edge nature of death, a true Divinity, and the end of all things. Life. Death. Between them is the edge which cuts clean, Kohler, hey? as a whistle.
   I could not say, as it’s been said of some, that he was a crank without a quirk, for Tabor was as quirky as they come, bent from birth, I am sure, into odd behaviors, some of which were only known to me near the end, when I visited him more frequently, and would sometimes watch him spill his tea in order to slurp the slips, or place a spoon on his saucer to listen to the silver rattle, or light matches to observe the waver of the flame. One’s dying, he said, ought to entertain.
   Death, they say, is democratic. Right? It makes no class distinctions: richer or poorer, better or worse, sick or well, white or black, jew or gentile; o mortal is mortal o, don't we moan? and mother will go though she suckled us, and father will go though he paid our way, and brother will fall and sister sicken, the snow, the poet says, is subject to the same, the beauty of the breast, damp on a wet stoop, light on a bright day, look on a face, every strength of character, every vice, every species, every holy place, the list of the fragile even has its end, though the list is as long, o mortal is mortal as mortal o, as any which can
be composed; whereas the momentary song, which seeks to save itself in memory, and reemerge through another’s tongue, on other lips, which infects mankind with its rhythms, meanings, metaphors, and rhymes, its sentiments and small desires, and tries to placate the implacable by praising it, fearing its powers, praying to its priests, crying mortal is mortal o mortal o, such a resourceful tune is doomed just as certainly as the solidist theory, the grandest design, the most convoluted plot, the simplest, plainest, purest line. Mortality itself is mortal, and will one day die, Being go up into the sky like a drying puddle, taking along the stain, the sidewalk, the gravel, the ground, and the very orbit of the earth, also mortal o mortal o mortal o.
   My mind is a pair of loose tongs. Yes? Death . . . ? Death makes no distinctions. (And we are privy to another chorus.) It kills kings, dissolves common table salt, each grade and grain without a qualm; without the least remorse erases both roebuck and bloom; stone and stone age and stone quarry and stone townhall, it pitilessly pulvers; rivers, mountains, even seas, it removes: artifacts and foolish schemes, discoveries, conquests, tyrannies—all, everything, anyone, in any realm of being, in any land of bliss or living hell. Gone. . . . Not for good, Kohler. Nor for anything. Gone like the light out. Snick, you see, or saw, snick, you once heard, snick, snick . . . hey? . . . snip, you may have felt, prick? . . . hey? . . . click . . . hey? . . . ck.
   I ought, 1 thought, to remain in this room with the Magus, instead of consorting with my memories of him and his decline: first, Tabor with the little limp, that tremor in the open palms I took to be a sign of his friendship with schnapps, the slight shake in the voice 1 put down to emotion, then the spells of falling down, when his limbs splayed suddenly like a raggedy man, followed by spasms which would travel across him like a frightened wire, the arm which would jerk so it lifted coffee from his cup, the wringing of his face, painful to observe, like a damp towel squeezing out its sop, the heaved speech which accompanied this—its hoos, hoots and whistles—as his lungs writhed in his chest like weasels caged together.
   Weeks before, when he could still talk, although his voice shook as if he were riding a train, 1 had gone to visit him in his few full rooms, to find the bed he lay in behind the barrier of his books, wiggle my way in between stacks of mags and heaped up papers, coffee cans stuffed with rolls of manuscript, an umbrella at the bottom of his bed like a bolster, the floor slippery with loose sheets, picture postcards, shillings, socks and buttons. There were balled papers he used to kick. Overturned study lamps. Posters on the wall he hissed at, on his knees. They advertised his public lectures. Now he crawled about, on a oar with the rats. 1 could write another book, he would brag, in the dust on my discards. What would that book be, I asked, with a smile of the only sort he
permitted—serious without being sober. Ah . . . you want to know about my duskbook—yes?—my book, as you would say in English, about the drying day. Now he’d grin. And grimace. They were a blend.
   There is the wet death; there is the dry. At death, there are two destinations for the soul, which, for this myth, we shall assume is still alive: the heaven of air, the hell of fire. The four forces do not form a square of elemental opposition, as was formerly supposed, but an oblong like a Pullman—isn’t it? Pullman train. The wet death passes through Hell as steam; the dry death blows like pollen through the cities of the sky to make the residents sneeze; god bless is said by a multitude no one cares is infinite. His laugh would burst out like a child from school, but only for a moment—caught and stifled as a cough ought, covered by a cloth. My dry book would be about the sapless, about the loss of juice, about eyes which cannot cry, about noses which cannot run, cunts which cannot moisten, about deserts and the boring mobilities of sand, of the dry life, which can only run out, never rot, which can come apart, but never decay. It would be the life and death of persons, then, like puzzles, who are made only of small parts, of pieces of pieces, and whose reality rests on what is juxtaposed: next to next makes their nest. He laughed his usual laugh. With these, death plays at jackstraws, lifting each element from among the others without the sign of a shiver from the pile.
   He laughed. I was transfixed, bidding adieu in the doorway, saying my last say. He laughed. Out of that shuffling, writhing encirclement of limbs had come a laugh as in old times—his ha! derisive, questioning, a point of pause. All the accents struck like proper bells. He had. He had laughed. And fallen face forward on the coverlet.
   Yet it was not his laugh. How could it be? It was not the last laugh. There would be others. Nor was it Laugh’s laugh. That laugh would not need a lung, a mouth, a laugher. No. It was its laugh. Its. As though it had come from a pack of cards with torn corners.
   1 forced myself to approach him, to try somehow to pick Tabor from his overfold, and place him upright anywhere flat, as you would a tipped top, his skin as cold yet alive as a snake s (I’m afraid I squeamishly whimpered); but, as if summoned, the Lady of Qualified Mercy was there (Meg’s name for an earlier nurse), brusquely pushing past me to slip her hands under his head. He does this a lot, she rather pleasantly said, turning what could only be called his skull, though it was jumping like a bean, to cheekside. This way he can still breathe. 1 muttered my apologies. He does it on purpose, she said pleasantly, he will die in terrible fear of God if he doesn't do something about it—prepare his soul, 1 mean. Will he do something about it, I asked in considerable wonderment. We shall have to do it for him, I suppose, the nun nurse said, pulling him upright
on the bed and wrapping the sheet tightly about his person. It did seem to slow his spasms. As you can see, she said, he can't do much on his own behalf. The Bishop may take a personal interest. The Bishop himself, I thought. To save the atheist who is no longer mentis? Have they a waterfall for that? some sort of after-the-fact baptismal drench which can be blended with Unction's redemptive mumbos and sprinkles?
   Meg had lived like a wet, full of energy and excess, but 1 was not sure he had not died a dry, like a handful of seeds on a shaken tambourine.
   And were he to cross that threshold while 1 stood here at his, would I hear the hiss of steam which Hell would heat his soul to, or would 1 suddenly sneeze, as the spores of him passed without further fuss into Heaven’s handsomely unfurnished outer space?
   Maybe what I saw, when 1 saw Mad Meg writhe, was his body grappling with this question as his mind had wrestled with it earlier; and if the contest went on in the new arena as long and as furiously as it had in the old, then poor Magus Tabor would jerk about and wiggle for what would surely seem an interminable time, repeating past gasps and grips and knotty gatherings, before his queries were wearied out, and he was allowed, as they say, to breathe his last.
   Well, I had one thing at least to hold on to, as well as one relief. I had that last laugh to serve as my dusty answer, and the comfort of knowing that among his many memento mori, there’d be no death mask.
WHY WINDOWS ARE From this window 1 can see
 IMPORTANT TO ME frd“,ss,ubbledjf>«be-
                                  neath the snow, and beyond that, through a leafless hedge, the frozen lowness of the meadow where my children sometimes skate; then at quite a distance, like a gray haze, trees. We live a long way from the river. There are miles of cornfield between us and the Wabash, which is hard as a piece of slate this time of year, its muddy banks congealed and stony, the peeled trunks of the sycamores gleaming like licked bones. Around them, weed-stalks, stiff and brittle, uncared for as a corpse’s beard, collect in thickets now so cold as often to be birdless. I never go there. I’ve bright eyes and still walk my weight around for pleasure; yet it’s always a window which lets me see. Windows, therefore, are important to me. My university has granted me a large one, high up and at the corner of the campus where winter’s stilled the swings in the public park and the grass in summertime is sandy. These windows are the porches of appearance. Through them move the only uncoded messages
which I receive. We've no sinking land to raise up mountains here, no silhouettes of giant hills. The horizon’s clear except for that occasional gray frieze, and soon a crowd of starlings will waddle over the crusted snow after last year's seeds. A bookish man, I make a count of bodies. Symbols lie in state around me, or they wait a wedding, christening, Second Coming—I don't know. 1 wish I had a vase for flowers, or on the sill outside, a temperature gauge. The pond smokes sometimes in the morning. Perhaps the roses will freeze. Where I am there’s Goethe, Dante, wisdom in brutality, blood in the peaceful page.
   How many books are worth a window? This half-closed eye 1 have here, or my wide one at the office, they let in whatever chooses them, and not at any shout of mine will they behave. Their scenes move on as surely as the threadline of my watch. For picture after picture they provide the frame, proscenium to stage, and everything is altered in them into art . . . or into history . . . which seems, in circumstances of my kind, the same.
                  /Que hicisteis vosotros gidistas, inlelectualistas, rilkistas . . . ?
   So I’m here, am I? That’s what she thinks: that I am here, washing my hands in this light, preparing for bed but not for her, because, as I’ve said, she’s too fat and I love another. And another. And another. Nothing in this little room is mine—this study where I lead my life, in Mad Meg’s chair, which I had shipped from Germany. He nearly died in it, my teacher, teaching still Covered, they carried him off on a tray to the hospital . . . like those sterile instruments whose appetite is operation. He grew even thinner there, even paler; shook so much they took his teeth. They took my mother's. My son, he said, my son . . . but I was no one’s son; spores in the air begot me; I was cultured in this country—a common, inexplicable disease. Instead of Mad Meg now I’ve Herschel, Culp, Planmantee, and Governali for colleagues. Herschel is a sad man, tired; he has a tired gray mustache; he slumps in his suit, its shoulders powdered with gray ash from his barely burning head. The folds of his face droop, his smile is tentative and thin; he apologizes for his every thought: I’m sorry, he begins. Pardon me, he says. Excuse.......I could lay my head on Her-
schel. Sleep. Ohio sleeps on the Ohio. Sleep the sleep light sleeps within a window. Herschel. Humble man and comfort pillow. Whose heels hurt Herschel as they tread him down, so full of feathers, fickle as a sneezing nose? He’ll smooth one dent to take another, receive each head that’s lowered onto him as graciously as whores at oral swallow any vintage and never, unkindly, send back the bad bottle. I hide in Herschel as he hides in me. Cocked, 1 look through Herschel where his hairs cross.
   When I woke, my face in the keys again, a wheelchair padded with red plastic sat in front of the building, its chrome intensely flashing as a ship might, signaling at sea. There were pocks in my lip and cheek, and a crease sleep made across my forehead, but below me I could see a lemon-yellow sweater trimmed in green, gray hair like a cloth cap, and a coarse gray lap robe at whose knotty bottom edge two scraps of green slack showed, while store-new yellow canvas shoes dangled from each trouser end. From my perspective, they seemed spilled: hair, robe, sweater, canvas shoes, as though discarded by a rider who had taken up his legs, perhaps, and walked, his hands remaining on the robe like mislaid gloves. I refused to remember them. Or the glint of glasses. It’s a woman. Her hair coasts slowly crabwise and a pale hand flutters up to rest the head. Earlier on this same cool sunny Sunday afternoon two girls in frosted hair like hers had wandered by the building, impishly waving when I looked down, both with light cosmetic faces, both wearing large soft buttocks in their trousers—the best thing about them—from which their straight and skinny trunks pushed up like impoverished trees, as if, despite anatomy, they were victims of overcrowding. The minutes pass, both hers and mine. She is so patient. My invalid and chastened body . . . lady . . .
                                   C'est avec nous que tout vivra
   And now her hands will rise to ennecklace her neck, though her gaze is still spilling from her face to fill her lap. I play my typewriter for her. Out the open window I send her her description. Is there any singing in her as I finger the keys which dented me, or does she only hear the groaning of her body? I play a romantic ballad:
                        This is my love, a cripple abandoned; roll her beside me on big wheels of chrome. Fishing for souls, you can see what I’ve landed: two boots and a tire, three jews still on fire, my cock in the crack of this crone.
Here come children. We are surrounded.
   Lou’s love nest for that other summer had a single second-story window. We could see the middle trunk and branches of the spruces close at hand, together like a clump of temples, a whole band of them, far away from Indiana . . across the ocean maybe ... 1 imagine—in Japan. The light passing
through became magical Though first a pale green which frequent rains had, where it entered, leached to yellow, it deepened in a net of twigs and secondary branches, growing heavier until it seemed to sink like sap along the gray and furrowed trunks, leaving lines like tidal water lipped around the dry old scars of the spruce, dark as armholes, wounds from many amputated sleeves. Now and then, still affixed or borne up by the living, a dead bough bloomed defiantly, its needles the color of thick rust; and through the interstices of all these—needles, twigs, and limbs—a pale blue sky would lie in burning patches like a distant lake—peaceful and lovely beyond endurance—while chickadees rode the gentle fanning branches with all the calm and arrogance of gulls.
   Look there, Herschel . . . how she is so patient. The sun is harmless, falling softly everywhere, though in the distance clouds are coming on like floes. Her head is up, unsteady on its stem, perhaps to watch the children running. Minutes pass, and there she sits, as 1 sit, in this cool day, among this beauty, rubber-wheeled as I am castered, listening possibly to my machine as it performs a piece of her life, and also, of course, a piece of mine. We’d make fine mates— a perfect pair. The muscles in my back are tight from tension, the tension of long sitting and hard work, of life in a swivel. What was she doing beneath my window in her red-armed chair? old cripple left outside to melt in a shumble of clothing, those canvas shoes kept stout with a shoe tree—and a wooden one, clearly. How did this happen? Who brought her here? Did her life last no longer than opened soda, thus to vanish silently in a magician's thin air? But now a young man in shades and sport shirt appears. Without a word the woman releases the brake—she has a puffy lined mushroom-pale face like my mother's—and without a word he trundles her bumpily onto the grass. Go, I say—go! for who wants a love like this crippled gray-capped drooping patient lady, held in stainless steel like a brace, and now going tippity-bippity over the lawn, even if she is lately warm from the sun and new clothing, even if her chair is red-armed, wheeled and gleaming?
   With the window open a wasp has flown in, and out of old habit 1 quickly put a match to his abdomen.
   Thus this day passes as all the others: a few small thoughts, some meager visions, half a dozen actions, each equally insignificant, the normal number of observations, none of them striking, the usual cigarettes and meals and useless erections, a few hours of work at the office, a few hours at home, one class, one student with a stupid question (but Professor Kohler, do you believe that Bismarck was . . . Bismarck was, young man, that’s what you must remember),
four chapters of a brash new book on the Weimar Republic which I’m to review (I’ve that wise bird by the balls, which is at least something), one trivial conversation—no, by god, three—about what, I’ve already forgotten, uncounted cups of tepid coffee, a glimpse in the hall of dark hair like Lou’s—almost growing—which made my farmer’s heart turn over, Planmantee at a distance (but seen plainly in my mind’s eye, teeth fleeing from his mouth), a little painful urination, Culp with verses written on his tongue, a tongue unfurling like a banderole, a feeling or two spread over the day like a small pat of butter—in short, the banal contents of a banal life; and then 1 take up my pen and fill more paper with these stiff Germanic figures of mine in order to say that this day has passed as others have, although darkness has fallen and I’ve neglected to turn on the light.
   I have to return to a phrase 1 wrote: . . peaceful and lovely beyond en-
durance . . Peaceful and lovely beyond endurance. Initially I typed these words on the machine at my office; now 1 copy them down here at home with a hand that’s dirty from digging. A peaceful scene, a lovely body, a coverlet bent back like a flexed leg: these are what should comprise life. Why should they be unendurable? The wine that lingers in the throat like a long evening, the meadow that’s on fire with flowers, an azure sky so framed by twigs as to make a lake, or instead some wondrous realization sudden as a swallow, the right note, right line: these are what should comprise life. Why should they be unendurable? Of course the sky clouds over the way moods do; nothing can be sustained, neither note nor line nor bottle; I know that—you and I— we know that. I also know—you and I both know—-that if things did not pass away, our interest in them would; so mutability produces only a small part of the pain that peace and beauty bring—a small part. If Martha and I had always quarreled, if it were always cold in Indiana, if our wine went down as if it were coming up, then at least we would finally accommodate our needs to necessity; we’d acclimate ourselves: born fat, fifty, stained—well, live stained then, fat and fifty all the way. And our comforts would remain. May is only one month in twelve, but it does arrive. Our head has been tenderly held in a happy hour. We did walk one day into a weedy field where migrating mon-archs rose to surprise us in a shout of thousands—the souls of the saved, we said—and in the midst of that colorful outburst we hugged one another and wept with exhilaration. Such a difference, indeed, is part of the pain. Joy amid sorrow, as the cliches say, is more sorrowful still. But that contrast, too, if it were carved in stone, if it were God’s inflexible rule, could be endured, and poets would find ways to praise it. However, 1 believe—both you and I believe—that life might have been otherwise; that it’s been wrongly lived, and hence lost; we are miserable outcasts on the mountains of the might-
have-been. This is the addition that elevates our anguish toward the unendurable. Suddenly our life savings will not buy a postage stamp. In armories or high school gyms, women will sit at trestle tables to sell the household silver. A man’s eye is closed forever by a youthful length of leg. Our national pride has been dragged through the dust like dogs with a dead rat. We labor only to slip back.
   Hope, remember, did not fly out of the jar like the rest of the evils, but remained there to tease us, to hold us back from suicide and every other sensible response; and it’s true, we would survive, for bad luck alone does not embitter us that badly, nor the simple presence of pleasure spoil the soul when pain also arrives, nor does the feeling that our affairs might have been better managed move us out of range of ordinary disappointment; it is when we recognize that the loss has been caused in great part by others; that it needn’t have happened; that there is an enemy out there who has stolen our loaf, soured our wine, infected our book of splendid verses with filthy rhymes; then we are filled with resentment and would hang the villains from that bough we would have lounged in liquorous love beneath had the tree not been cut down by greedy and dim-witted loggers in the pay of the lumber interests. Watch out, then, watch out for us, be on your guard, look sharp, both ways, when we learn—we, in any numbers—when we find who is forcing us—wife, children, Commies, fat cats, Jews—to give up life in order to survive. It is this condition in men that makes them ideal candidates for the Party of the Disappointed People.
   Every day that passes in pain or in the banality of a plain wrapper—deprived of possible pleasure, capacities unrealized, aims misdirected—brings us, as every day does, nearer our death, but closer without comfort or accomplishment. That is the point we disappointed people shall sharpen like a knife. What do we protest? That we die alive. Who shall blame us when we turn on our murderers then, and murder them?
   Our party shall have planks, by god, planks we shall walk our enemies out on. Let them teeter on the brink.
   And they shall be surprised—ah—look at the look of surprise in their eyes when they witness the turn of the worm; when at last we lowly trodden meek-ish people put on boots to put our foot down. So I salute the future of the PdP, growing hourly, daily more enormous in my mind, just as my dig deepens its subversive length . . . undermynes.
   We need a salute. Or perhaps a greeting. Perhaps a secret one at first, as lodges have, then later we’ll become larger, confident, proudly public. We need insignia for our insurgency: armbands, flags, and banners, unless something more original can be planned, emblems and uniforms, symbols and hierarchies, boots and caps.
  Hear me, Herschels of the Heart! Arise! But Herschels heart sets like the sun. And soon now it will be another day.
  Maybe . . . Perhaps . . . Just possibly . . . Herschel: you’re my muse. And here is Culp, the motor man, who’s always zizzing. Maybe . . . Herschel sends his claims of ignorance ahead of his approach like a scouting party. He’s ready in an instant to withdraw. I’m not up on this, he says. I sometimes think . . . Have a heart, Herschel, and tow away your rhyming friend. But he begins: I sometimes think . . . How he dares to think at all I’ve never understood, since it clearly seems so scary; still Herschel has a deferential charm, and when excited he will pinch his neck, as if to slow himself down—from what high speed I’ve yet to calibrate. Nevertheless he’s definite about one thing: the meek will never inherit the earth. He repeats this often, often out of any context which would lend it sense, and never in any which would remove it from cliche; he states it quietly, but with a conviction unusual for him, as if it were the single shamanism he’s learned in his life—his lonely truth—and I can believe it—for he is one of them, the meek, and he’ll inherit nothing. He lives his gray life out of common view, uncared for but by his wife, otherwise quite alone. He is a nebbish—Herschel. He’s one one kicks.
  On tiptoe, Culp, his arms outspread, jubilantly comes to a decision:
                    If I could choose another life,
                    I’d be a dog or American wife ...
   Where is my disintegrator ray, my camps, my ovens? Black doubts seize Culp suddenly:
                 or maybe in that other dawn,
                 I’d rather be a suburb lawn.
                 It’s hard to say which would be better: manicured girl, or grass, or setter.
NCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS A YOUNG * LES, A YOUNG MAN FROM ERIE, A YOUNG MAN
   Culp, head bowed, hands humbly clasped, confesses with noticeable contrition:
                                   I once went to bed with a nun who didn’t know how it was done.
                                     She thought that my handle was an offering candle, and lit me before I could run.
   I suggest a change in the last line which would improve the climax, but Culp is in a contentious mood. It’s a noyade I’ve planned for you, Culp, as in the Reign of Terror.
                       I once went to bed with a nun who put her hair up in a bun; not the hair on her head—no— she shaved that all off so dee dum dee dee dum dee dee dum.
  A sawbuck for any last line that beats mine, Culp crows.
IDUSKY, A YOUNG MAN FROM YOUNGSTOWN, A YOUNG MAN FROM WHOSE FA SMILES, OF WHOM I WAS LEERY, WHOSE ACCENT I
                                           I worked through sunset into silence.
                                 Chapter on ideology. Funny cartoons from Der Stiirmer. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg. Free silver.
                The spread of the pox. Shirer's curious reading of Mein Kampf. Racism as a Hebrew notion. Political motives of the Emancipation Proclamation. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg. Chamberlain, Nordau, and Gobineau. The Red revolt in the armies. Hitler’s philosophical genius. Mutterrecht.
                                    Cezanne's little sensation.
            Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg. The birch in English education. Lou Andreas-Salome's not sleeping with Andreas.
                  The a trois trip to Russia. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg.
                   Lenin at Yasnaya Polyana, where Rilke meets Tolstoy, is not invited to lunch, and Prussian militarism is overstated.
                              Asian influences in higher education.
                                      Grynszpan’s Crime.
               Wilson's women. Degas and Celine. Fantasia of the Unconscious. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg.
            Spengler as a closet optimist. Georg von Schonerer anticipates the Ftikrer. Hygiene. The shock of circumcision. Rosa’s monument. Harding's weakness. The Dawes Plan. Jung's defection. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg. Fichte, Schelling, and Heidegger.
                                    The goose step misnamed.
                                        Kristallnacht.
              Leopold Poetsch anticipates the Fiihrer. Madness and Masturbation. Lou Salome’s not sleeping with Nietzsche. Not sleeping with Freud either. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg.
                        Chesterton s degeneracy. Schopenhauer on silence.
                        Riots of joy at the first appearance of Der Scherer.
                   Fascinating account by Mr. Rosenberg. The Chevalier Raoul. Rousseau. Several shades of shirt. Kant 's clock.
                    The convert. The covert fascism of the Bloomsbury Group.
                    Irish marching songs. Giovanni Gentile and Social Credit. Cunnilingits. The Vienna Circle. Fagin.
                             Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg Pound of flesh. Ezra Pound. Eliot. Yeats.
            Honesty of anti-Semitism. Roosevelt not the god of the Jews as sometimes alleged. Fellatio. Hugo's huge ego. Maupassant’s satyriasis. Archbishop Laud. The Wreck of the Deutschland.
                      Patriotism of de Sade. Last chance to unify Europe lost.
                         Lincoln as leader. Zola's murder. Mozart's murder.
                The French overrun Paris. Culp the metermaid. Herschel as History. Fascinating remarks by Mr. Rosenberg.
                         Window shopping along the Kurfurstendamm.
      Culp, forefinger up, has an important announcement to make concerning his limerickal history of the human race, that is to say, the triumphant completion of Chapter MDCCCLXIV: the Geneva Convention.
                            The heads of all the great powers, after talking for hours and hours, were finally able, their guns on the table, to reach an agreement on prisoner treatment, and the cost of small funeral flowers.
      How quiet. The lights have left the building-—as I should leave—and the corridors will echo with me. Rug-smothered stairs are also silent. I open my door and listen in the hallway. Brick, glass, plaster . . . the tunnel’s unbreathing. I hold my own to hear its heart thud. When large sounds are gone the small ones swell up. Like those undernourished girls, so sweetly bunned. My blotter is also a cushion. Fanless air and cunts are quiet. Through pipes someplace a vein of water must be moving. On the window . . . nada . . . thickly brushed. Like coffee steaming from its cup, light streams from the punctured ceiling while I hang on for dear life, riding a spider who’s suspended down-side up. I’ve closed the case on my typewriter; there are no children noisily dreaming; my wife floats wildly in her anger somewhere like a slowly exploding pillow. The fog’s hush is mostly propaganda, but drapes do muffle. There’s soft wool and pewter, blood flooding my penis, swans swimming on eraser rubber, ashes and velvet. Stuffed chairs are quieter than skinny ones, and books dampen sound like the ground in a drizzle. My head expands and I hear my own voices, for when large cocks are absent, the small ones will cack-a-daddle.
      Some years ago, in a similar silence, though in another office of this building, I unscrewed with a dime a metal plate fastened low on the wall (it was like opening a tomb through the plaque on its monument), and entered a passage filled with cobweb and pipe.
                          . . . die auctioned, /wr (jja/m one day, cm a udum. . . .
   On edge I inched along. I was in one of the maintenance tunnels. Tales are told of them on every campus now: of students who lived in the tunnels all winter, for example, frying eggs on steam tubes and boiling coffee, or how an enterprising fraternity man stole final exams from the mimeo room and thus, by the end of his senior year, had founded his future fortune, or how a group of solicitous girls, where a passage widened nicely like a thigh, established a profitable brothel (boys eagerly entering while propped on wrapped pipes, or on conduits
          crammed with impulsive wires and other things electrical). In one of the many houses I lived in as a child there was a long narrow arm of closet off my room which bent around a central chimney. Unless you pushed your way through my kiddie clothing, hanging like beaded strings to ward off flies, you couldn’t know that it went out of sight like an elbow. There on the arm where the fist would be I often hid, as I also sometimes did in the lollipop maples that lined our street—made chunky by the telephone company which was always topping them. I lived in the limbs more like a coiled snake than a bird; I was a boa constrictor or a Bengal tiger; and 1 showed my evil teeth, or I wickedly leered, as people passed unwittingly under me. I may have been physically confined in that closet, and certainly the maples didn t permit much movement if you wanted to remain hidden by the leaves, but I was totally free in the realm of spirit. I was, as I should say now, a true self-by-itself, and so a self-inside-itself like Kant’s unknowable noumenal knower, when I crouched in the backside of my parents’ bedroom ingle; yet I was every bit an untrammeled and fountain-ous will too—a pure gust of forthcoming, as Rilke might have written—a perception, a presence, a force. To enter yourself so completely that you're like a peeled-off glove; to become to the world invisible, entirely out of touch, no longer defined by the eyes of others, unanswering to anyone; to go away with such utterness behind a curtain or beneath a tented table, in the unfamiliar angles of an attic or the menace of a basement; to be swallowed by a chest or hamper as the whale-god swallowed Jonah, and then to find yourself alive, and even well, in the belly of your own being; to go so supremely away like this was to reenter through another atmosphere, and to experience, perhaps for the first time, a wholly unpressured seeing; it was bliss; and I remember the killdeer running across a wet meadow, his own strident cries of joy and exultation taking him aloft as easily as the wind lifts the seeds of the maples, though even more wildly, so steep are the slopes of his rising; and if this is what the Marquis had in mind when he spent himself; if he thought this the god in his overworked phallus, he was on the right track though he took the wrong train, for he did want his partners to sink into the sleep of objects, their cries of pain and pleasure to take place, like bullets kissing in their ricochets (any agitation of things: the hum of wires, or the whine of machinery), as if neither the prick nor the aim of its pricking were in any human presence. For me it was not quite the same. When 1 played Satan in the tree, or rode the New York subway later, 1 was not an animal in anybody's little cage of vision, but they were surely caught in mine. Your mother, the doctor wondered, does she tend to play the passive role in your parents’ marriage? Does she do-si-do? and do the dipsy? circling her partner like a planet? Dunno, was that the role usually given to Mae Marsh? Yes, l should say so, not usually. Is she the rolled and folded,
    strangled, beaten dough? Also, I should say, she played the ingenue, the downstairs maid, the scullery girl, the saucy scamp taught finally to toe the line by life, the giggly girl brought down from her effervescence and forced to sit in a slow glass, clinging to its cool sides, and holding, only holding its own. How often, 1 didn’t tell the doctor, could 1 have killed him for it. The loss of that warm, that smiling, embracing, motherly nature. So it—so she—seemed. The smell of that soft embrace. What a grief, if not to her, to me: the departure of happiness from her face. I’d have gladly put on a Jugend shirt and shorts in order to denounce him. Yet Dante could not have punished him more pitilessly than he has been. Calcified. Turned to bone. In the closet’s ell I might hide from the Indians, other wild things, the sight of mom being pawed at a party, the usual. Any hideyhole could offer the same comfort, and my friends and I dug some, covering them with cardboard, and once we buried a refrigerator box, cleverly placing its entrance in a thicket, the way I've hidden the beginning of this unbeknownst book. How stupid adults were, we thought; they'd never guess that if we wished and if they continued to hound us, we could go to ground like the fox, hide out in a moment like the James brothers. I made elaborate bed tents too, stretching blankets from the headboard which I pressed against the wall to pin them there. Under that canopy 1 would lie hidden for hours, my penis like a baby chick I tenderly warmed with my hand. The love I lavished on myself then, later only Lou received ... the nubbled wool, the eventually exasperated nerves ... the sky-blue blanket like a sky-blue sky . . . the wholly imaginary breeze . . . unwetting rain. Such shelters from the world really widen the vision: how much we took in, yet how far we also went with our inventions. St. Anthony saw monsters, shapely women, too. It was in one of those early hideaways (they were trenches, castles, dugouts, outposts, graves) that 1 accomplished my second seduction. My first was a cousin, tall as a column, whom I ravished from a distance. She loved to finger the lobes of my ears while my swollen eyes entered her. The second was a neighbor, round as a hug. Both grew up and haired themselves over, I imagine, but then it was only their twats which were naked, smiles without lips like the Mona Lisa’s; yet bringing that girl underground as I did, and stretching her out for examination—O my newfelt finger! my vast middle of the West!—was a violation of that sacred space, and earned me the vengeful anger of the gods. The reality of your daydreams was what you were intended to perceive there, not the dreamy unreality of underclothes, or between pale skinny thighs that little pouty container. And the silly twit kept exclaiming: why do you do that? why do you want to touch me there? Well, why do I want to wade in mountain water? rub my penis on the cartilage of Lou’s ear? Desire is epidemic, though we are given shots when young to ward it off, and at a later age wear charms
         like chips of holy bones around our necks against it. So your father was the active partner then? How should 1 know whose ass moved most? My father? that pusillanimous bastard, that bantam rooster and twice-a-life cripple in his wheelside highchair? yes, he was active, ran the dash, and thrashed his legs the whole length of the long jump, except that he landed in pain, not in sand or sawdust, moistened clay, or the soft marsh of my mother, and his bones blew up. When my unsmiling mother—my sweet mumum—then young and heartfaced in a way I never knew her—hauled me like a wagon from my impromptu schooling and sat me in a corner of the kitchen the remainder of the morning where, while she quietly ironed, I silently dunced, it never occurred to me to think we hadn’t hidden our hole well; and though I knew she believed I’d been bad with my neighbor, it never occurred to me, either, that our investigations, as completely removed from the world as we were when we undertook them, weren’t entirely secret. No, I knew my mother—soft, guiltless being. I knew she didn’t know a thing. And the publicly pronounced charge against me was no more honest than the one which poisoned Socrates: I had taken off the sweater I’d been told to wrap myself with to counter the wind. Her rayon pants had made a red crease like a thin red worm across her belly. For a bit 1 thought it really belonged to her body. I had pulled my pullover over. Therefore 1 had sinned. So 1 built buildings full of hidden hallways with my blocks—secret stairs and unreachable rooms. Played spy. With pencil and paper drew mazes of brightly tangled hair you couldn’t find your way in, wander through, or even scissor out of. And reread the designs in our rugs as maps of unscalable mountains or impenetrable forests, sheer cliffs and fast rapids, lands gone without anyone’s caring from all human view: swamps infested with moccasins, deserts where the wind blew solid sheets of sand in your eyes and lead soldiers wandered in circles till they tipped over on their backs and died, oceans in perpetual state of storm, whirlpools and murderous shoals, ice floes which crumpled ships like paper in an angry fist, quicksand and volcanoes, canyons, treacherous arroyos, waterfalls which disappeared in their own mists, and endless stretches of emptiness and cold—snowfields cut with crevices abruptly opening under you and closing slowly as you fell like some huge child’s indifferent mouth upon a piece of sucking candy. There were islands which sank or exploded, seas which grew so calm a rock could not have rippled them—out of sight of land, marooning you in birdless water; there were bewildering fogs and circular winds, tidal waves, areas where landslides were endemic, where blizzards were continuous and earthquakes habitual: hills bursting, lengths of earth slipping like crocodiles into the ocean, lakes spilled, their basins broken, entire regions split like logs or covered with lava like syrup on a sundae, while everywhere droughts, fires, floods, and famines were as frequent and in-
   escapable as drawing breath. I’ve lived in the landscape of that carpet ever since, beset but protected, swept by silent gales and mute contractions, guided by designs which others see as merely decorative and meaningless. I also hid things under stones, behind pipes and baseboards, in rafters, lofts, on cornices, in jars and jugs, beneath bark, in every cranny 1 could find—so often and so well that like a squirrel I sometimes lost them—pennies, matches, candy, gum, documents in codes I had constructed or messages in milk or lemon juice and later semen (the chief ingredient in a formula I never found effective), and then eventually two blurry photographs which showed a pair of hairless nude Chinese, in postures both unnecessary and impossible, engaged in acts for which I had no name. I also carefully nested boxes (never quite so well as my aunt would learn to), told an endless string of inconsequential lies, and publicly maintained a whole series of beliefs I privately put no stock in, among them: Santa Claus and Shirley Temple, the fun of birthday parties, scouting, Ferris wheels, and baseball, the uncertainty of future happiness, all honesty, the therapy of work, what a pleasure it was to give or how nice it would be to have a sister, the peacefulness of Sundays, roller-skating, the perils of chewing gum, the prize in Cracker Jack, anything at all three miles from me, each of those rules my father described as summing up common sense or Herbert Hoover, and every one of the so-called laws of God, Man, Nature, and the State. The older I got the oftener 1 disappeared down trapdoors which looked deceptively like squares of sidewalk or seemed to be postboxes or had the modest, servile air of back steps—never through anything so obvious as a manhole—and once I’d gone "in,” I might travel to a cupboard in a blink, appear behind a sofa or a chair, a closet or a locker, from whence, with mousy caution, I’d emerge to live a little where the clock ticks; to dwell “out there,” as I contemptuously referred to it, and condescend to be in common view and touch again, the world’s awareness eroding me like rain; but as an ordinary mortal, with a merely mortal presence, mortal powers, not a soul suspected I was dangerous, so it was one more sort of smooth disguise. Then in another house (for we moved, and moved, and moved), I was able to drop from my bedroom window, always with the softness of a pillow, to the roof of the back porch—it had an easy slope—and I would make my way from there, when the garage door was open, across its thin, wobbly, wooden edge—an intrepid, a beautiful balancer—to the garage roof next, with its far more radical pitch. Here I took a tree, and then, quite easily, another—a moving miracle of a man, a drifting wraith (1 was never a boy—I was never—boyhood was for babies)—moving, drifting, as 1 consider it now, perhaps fifty or sixty dangerous, dizzying feet across our lot and maybe a bit beyond it, where 1 swung down from a limb and touched my toes to a garbage lid. Playing hide-and-seek, 1 could disappear in
         a twinkling, and whenever I tired of the game I would float through the trees and pass over buildings to my window. Below me, out there, for many minutes sometimes, the befooled would continue calling and pursuing. Yet no one guessed my divinity. No one knew me. This part of my life was bliss as nothing in it has been since. To be free is the greatest blessing the world never gives. Though my family flotsamed, I felt safely above the stream like a bird in branches. There’d always be forgotten places, wide-eyed windows which imprisoned their perceptions; everywhere some cubbyhole or spy-tree grew unwitnessed. In any neighborhood there’d surely be paths of concealment crisscrossing it, and those virginal countries with their small bald vaginas too, where I could go as sudden as surprise into retirement—into my secret company, my private childhood, and my conspiracies. You can lose yourself in a book (as I was more and more frequently to do), but my peekaboo, treetop life was pure gain; I did not trade myself for any other, turn myself in for Tom Jones; and I instinctively understood why Alice went after the rabbit or melted in her mirror: the tunnel, all the other side, was more attractive than either glass or rabbit. That’s why windows are important to me, and I suppose why I continued to crawl behind my office wall like a worm in the building until I found myself caught in the passage, unable to back or turn, and frightened of going on. Now I know how it feels to be lodged in a throat. It scarcely mattered whether I really hid behind my hangered clothing, in a hole felt the funny folds of girlies, or as pure spirit passed through walls, or sank like dust into the carpet and became its implacable climate and ferocious geography; 1 went away every time with the same result: that powerful out-of-the-world feeling; and like the killdeer, less than weightless, propelled by outcry, by the sheer force of my freedom, would see my soul expelled from its body, and with a following sigh, my pistoned penis spit its seed. Beneath me, in the sulky darkness, rows of wheelchairs like parked cars attend this show of silence. The maimed march in robust lines through the stadium, handfuls of gravel strike the drums; the mad, the sane, the sober and the drunk cry out. Flags snap and flutter in the general shout as the yellow polished brasses bellow. My study smokes. My office door is shut. Rockets for the Fourth fly up. Perhaps the frost will draw roses. It is warm in the tunnel, and not as dusty as you might think, remote as an intestine in its fatty coat, safe from the haze of human shuffle. My father was the active partner—yes ... my mother melting Jell-O, pudding pulp. He ended up in chains, his royalty around his wrists and ankles, while she, long past Ophelia’s pearly beauty, drowned herself in drink . . . was twenty years in dying, the life span of the poplar. Look at the precision of the rows, the helmets growing like bushes in a formal garden. Oh the multitudes were massed: flagged and belted gangs gathered from every corner of the Reich, each throat
   a trumpet, sounding at least the trump before last. What a sight! And their yells shot up with a dry whistle and then blew to starry pieces all July, all August, all repose. Appreciate the precision of the rows. My life as turbulent as grocery string, I wrap these thoughts in puny bundles. A sleeve had caught me, and a button. I tore both crawling out. I could not hold the dime still when I screwed the entrance back, and the plate kept slipping out of alignment. How quiet. How quietly the light beats on my books. See how it leaps from metal to metal to mimic a percussionist. My father grew his bones together. They swelled like tubers at the joints. My mother merely . . . wept and shook crossing Canada one day when we’d run out of liquor. Hard are the hardships of a traveler in a foreign country. Down on you, you merely snickered, then asked me coldly how you tasted. Why should another’s body be so beautiful its absence is as painful as the presence of your own? I bit my thumb enough it bled. You taste like the Third Reich, 1 said, bloodsalt on my lips, and you were offended. I think you are tasting the taste in your own mouth, you said. You were offended, yet 1 would never love my wife again. A cunt that’s so indifferent to the tongue cannot be trusted One of my two truths. Look at the lines: foot, boot, bootlace, trouser, and rifle, arranged like music over Europe, the Reich and its leader, dancing their limerickal dance.
                              They discovered in one of the camps how to make lews into lamps; but whenever they skinned them, the dirty kikes bit them ...
   Mad Meg stirs his pots. I fight shy of women, leave the companionship of the front line to other men. How quiet Quiet. One can feel the lawns lying in darkness like the pelt of a beast; there’s the scent of red pencils, the hum of distant energies, ranks of closed doors at attention. Did I hear the scream then, then the groan—one or the other?
                              so, their jaws held by wires, with a fine pair of pliers, they extracted their teeth in advance.
     Close call. Martha noticed some dirt—a sizable smear, actually—on my left trouser leg, slightly in my rear, that's why I missed it. What happened there? I have to twist myself about and pull at the cloth in order to inspect it. Oh my, good heavens, look at that, I can’t imagine, well, it must— I must have brushed against something in the attic. The attic? Yes. Looks more like mud to me.
        What were you doing in the attic? Oh . . . the old albums ... I was hunting them up. Pictures, you mean? whatever for? I had a yen, you know . . . ummm ... at the office the other day, Culp was going on about his great-uncle somebody, died of hatchet wounds, he said, bullshit, say I, and how he bled for four days, a week, I don’t know—then 1 remembered Uncle Balt, you remember Uncle Balt? no? a relation distant as a planet. . . anyway, I remembered old Balt—odd—but I couldn’t remember what he looked like—short, tall, fat, nothing—not even a blurry image. It nagged at me the way a name—you know—nags . . . So? So I went up to look for the albums. I can’t imagine where they’d be—did you-—? Yup. Who is Uncle who? heavy, low-mowed hair, him? the butcher? nope, the farmer. Haven't found his photo yet. Everybody else's image seems to be there, but so far not his—no Uncle Balt.
           After dinner I had to slip off to the attic and fetch down the photos. Covered by the cobwebs of deception. We actually sat in the living room for a bit and looked at the albums together, Martha’s right breast pressed against my left arm as in the old days, slowly turning the pages and talking until I began to feel a little something.
           I wear overalls now when I dig—the kind that go on over your clothes. 1 keep them rolled up and hidden under cardboard down there. So it must have been when I went into the furnace for a little peek—to see if all was well. I’m in up to my neck now. Have to be more careful not to get caught, and if caught, to lie more efficiently. It was a yellow streak of mud all right. A yellow streak.
           I pretend I’m nineteen and- rub my arm back and forth a bit. She doesn’t draw away, but she doesn’t respond either. The photographs have filled her. I’ve flipped her genealogical mania on, alas, and she’s lit. My feeling for her, like a slight sweat, cools me as it dries.
           I didn’t have time to scout the attic for hiding places, but it occurred to me that it would be a good place to conceal diggings. I’ll need more boards, too, and I did see the extenders of a dining room table up there, leaning against a stack of state history magazines as high as a small boy—Carl’s height still, he’s such a stunt.
           That’s what we did. We waited to see if he could keep pace with our pileup of National Geographies, though the graphics had got a head start because I’d subscribed for a few years before Martha and 1 were wed. ‘Wed.’ What a word! How is the good woman these days, anyhow—these days of digging? Larger than life, I’d say; smaller than love. A head start seemed okay. Otherwise it wouldn't be an honest contest. And Carl did surpass Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor’s slow but steady entry ... for a while. His paper plant put up three fresh inches every year—regular as cock work—so that eventually its tortoise overtook our Achilles. Carl::Achilles—there’s a bitter comparison. Despite
   Martha’s objections, I let the magazines mount one another until the tower threatened to teeter. For me it became a kind of secret symbol for, and measure of, our marriage. We finally were ashamed to stand our wee declining offspring against those glacially persistent slabs. We thought Carl might also lose what heart he had. The kids were already calling him “Kropped,” when they werent calling him “CacaKohler,” or suggesting that his father was the inventor of indoor plumbing. We had a yardstick—I see it in the broom closet still, leaning against the brooms—yellow with black markings like the mags. A simple stick of disappointment. At least it didn’t lengthen. Then one night the stack slid and five feet of culture collapsed on the floor above our bed, creating a burglar and adding to marital tensions.
     1 still like to hold them—her heavy breasts. They fill your palms like nothing in this world.
     Culp comes uninvited into consciousness. Well, hey, howzit goin? I’m holding my own, I guess, I say. He hoots, makes the shame sign, produces a stage leer longer than one entire act.
     I’m not working at my digging the way I ought to be, either. You’d think, since I’m going into my own mine, I'd be eager for it. I started out hot and intense and nosed into the earth like a driven bit. Now I’m taking too much time designing outfits for the Party of the Disappointed People: uniforms, armbands, bunting, and such. There should be a women's auxiliary, I suppose, and a youth brigade, too, but the latter should in no way resemble the Boy Scouts with their pederast patrol leaders and their goody-goody maxims. ’Youth Corps" is too reminiscent of Roosevelt’s New Deal doohickey. What would they do besides hike, keep healthy, and spy on their parents? They could stand in solemn circles and sing inspiring songs. The party needs a few rousing slogans, some striking names. Our cells can call themselves "Deeplies.” Should we have a handclasp? The question remains moot. A salute? The salute, 1 suspect, is important, but would such a public gesture succeed? Only elephants and asses— populist jokes—represent the political parties in this country. Or the bull moose. The clenched fist is childish and strikes nothing but a wrong note. Holding one’s nose would represent the right attitude, but it lacks dignity. Extending an empty hand? Perhaps a palm in front of the face, as if shielding its sight, guarding its identity? no, that’s the gesture of a criminal in custody, concealing his face from the camera. The Fascist salute looks borrowed from one of Karl May’s awful books about American Indians. “How” and "Heil” are harmonious. In the USA we like to pretend we’re not a military nation when we grow more guns than grain. So we could form a gun with our right thumb and forefinger and then thrust it forcefully into the air. The gesture could be made discreetly, too—merely by quietly opening the top two fingers of a fist. Like the
       right-on or you-got-it sign. Or how about the dollar sign done to resemble barbed wire? The PdP will eliminate from national life our habits of hypocrisy. What the other parties avoid, we shall embrace. We shall be the ones with the handshakes like the Shriners, the symbols, the slogans as if we were selling something, the shirts, the salutes, and the flags. More bunting than babies. Culp could be a help here. dniDJSSln] YlnlE ©©MMiDWIinn?  no, insuf-
       ficiently serious, but how about ©ASK Y© YlnlE ©A$;0CS8? an entire alphabet of simple sayings: ©NlttY YlnlE A©1LE EAT! or we could create some general form.
                        KIffl@©K@(y)T [Crime, Waste, Commies?]
                              [LEA©! T© ©AWL®? ©©2$;
       It might be prudent to be less aggressive in the beginning. Better not let Culp into this. 1 can hear his alphabet. PHUlfSIlllST DU YlnlE ©IMlDJif ©[^©PE!^ WAY Y© IPOS©! We could have a gun discharge day to celebrate the power of the common carrier. Let the authorities know where the jism is. At high noon on some selected Saturday—say—every gun in the USA would jack itself off at the sun. A real hail of lead, blood from a bleeding sky. YlnlE ©(LDILILiY, YlnlE ©AKlIPp YtfDE EOPEAPKfflSl [MlAKiP! The difficulty with my party is that the unity, enthusiasm, and dedication necessary to make it work are nowhere in the nature of a dP. Little d, large P, yes. Disappointed, displaced, depressed, deprived: we are Prufrock’s people. Only a chance to strike an unanswerable blow will bring us out and encourage us to cheer again. What have we been made of but meanness by now? And meanness usually darts out of a small dark corner like a rat. The nip-and-run’s our dance. Yet if we were to recover a bit of pride, we might be able to make ourselves into harassing gangs. So we shall make our pitch to the huddled elites, the ins who are on the outs.
          We’ll need to nail down some sort of platform, too, some seven-point program put in terms of Chinese stages, Prussian periods, Soviet steps, forward leaps. Thoughts compressed and polished and sharp as placard staples. Stressing broken promises, punctured hopes, and empty dreams. A litany of WK1EPS ME TKIi„.. ? happy families. WIKliPI OS YME...? nation's pride. We will have to invent a single enemy to be our bull’s-eye, spouse for our spleen. That’s essential. A head in a hole to hurl at. The Jews were such a soft and jellysweet center, they made it easy, chose themselves. Now they probably think the Holocaust has made them immune. We can't let nigs in the PdP, of course, but we can't goat them either. The PdP is meant for people of broken promise, for whom there was once hope.
       ©HUY LOYTILE ©DJY8 KEEP ©0JP ©1UCKS ®K1 THE KESi^AYD©IM!
          I've become accustomed to the anomalies of my present life. Consequently, I’ve gotten careless. The other day 1 discovered Martha washing off my mud-
   covered soap. I’m also piling up these sheets at an alarming rate . . . well, not alarming, really: I’m not alarmed; I’m—what? surprised. And to what end? They accumulate as steadily as the Geographies did. The other day 1 found myself actually planning a piece on Planmantee. Appalling development. If that, what next? Martha may think I’m still hacking away in here on grim old Guilt and Innocence because, of course, the way I'm concealing these pages in it, G & 1 keeps rising like a river in flood. I’ll soon be running out of Wortraum. Maybe I’ll call it “Carl” and stack it up against those other stacks. Yet this growth is mere appearance, for my present pages slip between the sheets of my heroic history—my courageous revamp of the Third Reich and what it was— and complete them with their cancellation My history is objective and orderly and factual and keeps military step with Time, whereas these notes are scrambled and secret and even more sordid, abuzz as they are with honest lies, and they straggle after Time like whores after soldiers—
     It’s true, though. I could call these sheets I’ve slipped between more sheets “My Struggle.”
     Ah, Culp, don’t you love the phrase—doesn’t it make you want to gargle?— the phrase “between the sheets”?
     Books of black pages, they lie heavily on my knees. Windows to the past, they once were, these sheaves of photographs, these albums all in corkface, in mourning. They commemorate a time when families could still put their mark upon a man or woman; back before the genes were carelessly dissipated like piss from a plane. Then, a name was a name, and signified something: status, maybe, influence, character, heritage, history. The biographer began with grandparents, or went as far as records would allow, not merely out of respect for biblical convention, but because the copulative past—because one’s begetters—counted. The family tree bore family fruit. But now it’s merely Martha’s mama. Every wife has a Hodgepodge for a husband while Miscegenation twists her engagement ring and awaits her wedding. So I might as well have an Uncle Balt. His invention affects me more in this moment than he would if he’d ever lived. You could look at a chin then, or the placement of the arms, and see a strength and resolution got from grandfather the way Meg might have got the syph. You could examine the ears, as Hitler did, for traces of Jewish degeneracy. Once upon a time you dressed, you prepared, you posed, stiffening like a corpse for the camera. It was your sole chance, perhaps, to become immortal in the guise of an image, fixed within a little window like a scratch on the pane.
     Windows have always been important to me. I remember suggesting to my high school teacher that I write on windows as my exercise in the Baconian
          essay. Why not write on reading, Miss Marm wondered, you do a lot of that, or write on writing, or on one of the virtues—patience, prudence, industry—no one writes on windows. Write about the miracle of books. That’s a good subject. A book, 1 wrote, is like a deck of windows: each page perceives a world and tells a fortune; each page at least faintly reflects the face of its reader, and hands down a judgment; each page is made of mind, and it is that same mind that perceives the world outside, and it is that same mind that reflects a world within, and it is that same mind that stands translucently between perception and reflection, uniting and dividing, double dealing. It's clear that you copied your paper, Miss Duck said (what do ducks do but quack and coo the whole night through); it’s not your work, and simply couldn't be your work; from whom did you steal it? where did you get it? did your daddy find it for you? in some fancy magazine, maybe?
            1 shared the joy of the Jews in unjustified accusations.
            Consider buildings, 1 wrote in my allegedly stolen prose, imagine buildings, their covers closed and latched like diaries, buildings from which light would never leak to let you catch even a drop from the stream of life within. The dark dead streets, Miss Duck, like ditches, drain people through the town. Miss Duck (for that was, indeed, her name, not Miss Mam or Marm, of course) said she would keep my piece to show to the principal. 1 had written formulas on my fingernails and peeked at other pupils’ papers, but these words happened to be mine and 1 was pleased Miss Duck (whose name wasn’t nearly awful enough for us, so we called her Miss Uck) believed it had been written by Higher Powers. (Wanna buy a duck, we asked; uck! came the answer; what would I do with a duck? You fuck a duck, dummy, we said then. Well, I wouldn’t duck a fuck, even if—uck!—I had to fuck Miss Duck, the rigamarole went on, repeating and repeating itself.)
            Recovering from a childhood illness, I would sit at the window where a bird might pass, a panel truck, a messenger boy on a bike, to watch the grass bend beneath a patter of rain, wetting the window, too—here . . . there ... as I gazed—until the glass became a run of water 1 looked up through, and the street and trees smeared. There was Miss Duck’s butt bloating above me, her feet dangling below her bottom like loops of loose suspender.
            Sometimes the world will grow so dark before a rain, it seems underwater before the water comes, and the rain arrives intrusively as gravel.
            Like the house, we feed on light, 1 told Miss Duck. Light is our liquid, and aren't we mostly water? After the rain, on the uneven pavements, there would be shining rings of evaporating damp around the puddles where you could look into the depths of the earth and find sky and bird and tree again, though quite changed into shades and former selves as the inner depths traditionally require, their registers of gray resembling photographs taken by the mind’s eye.
     I do not remember the occasion, and perhaps 1 wasn’t there, but once upon a time light came and clothed my cousins in its regard, only to flee instantly into the camera where it hid its real designs. Now that same light, released, yet indentured to its form, returns itself to me, in muddy photographs, puddles to the past. Knickered, frocked, my cousins stand in front of a painted trellis strewn with grossly petaled roses and coarse green leaves. They stand as stiffly as their image will become, as if to aid it in the course of its congealing. They are staring at me, each of them, round-eyed, staring as if their eyes could no longer help themselves but looked on as open windows look when all inhabitants are gone—as indeed many of them have, since my cousins were an ill-favored and grimly fated lot.
     Well, I wrote about books as Miss Duck desired, but as if they were windows, finally writing on what 1 wished (she didn’t like that); and 1 wrote about windows as if they were photographic places or even prints. Windows—let’s see, I said—are convenient for identifying the sexual intentions of visitors. They are handy for displaying yourself as well, as though you were on sale, or rent, as, of course, you might be, in Hamburg, say, in one of the more genteel stews. These observations didn’t fetch her. Windows were good for loosing the arrows of enmity, or for spying, peeking between drapes parted for the purpose, or peering past a puckered curtain: there, across a courtyard, would be a shape on a shade, because windows let in eyes like summer moths, and shades which simply pull down, scissor the light into a tantalization. Such sights happen rarely in real life, but they are so often written about as if they did happen often in real life that in real life they must be much dreamed. In addition, I informed Miss Duck, windows are wonderful for contemplating chaos and deep night. I suggested that the blackboard was also excellent in this regard, furnishing a reliable rendition of the abyss. But unfetched and full of dislike, Miss Duck decided to accuse me of plagiarism. 1 pointed out that my piece was so quintessential^ myself that to imagine another person writing it was absurd; that 1 was, after all, about to graduate from her simpleminded school at age fourteen, hence I might be expected to display, now and then, a few ideas, a little special phrasing, some smarts; and that, all right, okay (I confessed with a false teary shudder), yes, my father had found an essay on the subject in Schopenhauer (the Saunders translation, was she familiar?); he had insisted that I submit it to you, Miss Duck (some credit to the family, he felt, might accrue), only, however, after updating a few phrases (‘slate’ altered into 'blackboard,’ for instance, ‘hellhole’ modified to say abyss’); and he would certainly beat me when he learned that I’d been found out. I don’t know if she ever actually took my case to the principal. There was no upshot, no fallout either. I graduated in due course, with no one taking particular pride in me, neither fellow pupils, parents, nor teachers.
            I was certainly not the first youngster to be exiled for excellence, destined, without leaving home, to become a foreigner, an alien from the country of accomplishment. And I would not be the last to resent the attitudes which hemmed me in, and to loathe the ordinary in the world around me. I was simply blunter about my feelings than most. I had learned rather early how much the truth was disliked and distrusted, how much hearing it soured every state of the soul and injured every organ of the body: ear, head, heart (in that order), soon the belly, before descending to torment the bowel; so 1 spoke it—I held to it with more than customary dedication. Had the other virtues had such malicious consequences, I should have practiced them as energetically. (Now, of course, 1 lie as if the truth depended on it.) The common run detest me, I thought, so why shouldn’t I detest the common run? Yet here 1 am, the founder of the Party of the Disappointed People. We, in the PdP, with our tender and tormented, truth-beaten bodies: the common run will run out our bowels right enough. Later I would learn that sheer commonness was what we had in common, unlike the common preciousness of gems or the community of chlorophyll in leaves, but rather more like the commonness in unkindness or the common cold. I heard vulgarity in Wagner like one of his horns. Doctor Sera-fico was addicted to beating off. Even Fra Angelico’s supreme and saintly art served superstition. Imagine Maillart’s bridges soaring solely over sewers. That was, and remains, the situation. This commonness I speak of is nevertheless quite unusual. It is oddly shaped yet familiar in the way flatulence is familiar, or the barking of dogs, or the arrival of Friday, just as the anteater’s snout or the elephant's trunk, ordinary to the elephant, average and everyday to the anteater, is astonishing, fascinating to us, ludicrous.
            It would be an additional deception on my part to pretend that my high fidelities to honesty have helped me, because the fact is that they have seriously damaged my reputation as an historian, though I turned away from poetry in my youth because I thought the truth ill-treated there but welcome like another fallen temple among the ruins of the past. Admittedly, I was a fool. No one wants balance, truth, or fairness from history. No one. Everyone wants a consoling myth. And the consolation either takes the form of an assurance that X, whatever it was when, like every dog, it had its day, was singular, solitary, and unique, and that nothing like it could possibly happen again; or it imitates the pooh-pooh of condescension (Planmantee’s forte), insisting that things like X happen all the time, almost nonstop if you are so stupid as to have to be told. The first consolation is supported by a description of X which is so detailed and minute and grounded in local circumstances that it has no generality at all, and words despair of successfully narrating it; while the second depends upon a case put so abstractly (numerically, if Planmantee were to have his way) that a
  load of air would seem a gross heap beside it. It's gone and done for, goodbye forever, the first says, we shall never again see its like, what a wonder; its return is inevitable, better duck, says the second. It’s water over the dam; it’s spilt milk: that’s Number One’s wisdom; there’s always more where that came from, is Number Two’s. The Germans were wicked in a one-time way, the Jews are a supremely special case, the Holocaust cannot occur again: that is what the First maintains. Holocausts have been happening since time first set up tock: that’s the Second’s assertion; and when Cain killed Abel, it was the equivalent of a holocaust, if you consider the percentage of the total population that one bad act subtracted. For the First, the Holocaust is a surd, and really ahistorical, as are all events if so minutely regarded. Any similarly examined condition is so extreme one cannot find a mean. Like a color which has no place in the continuum. Governali calls this point of view theological, while I prefer to think of it as esthetic; but Governali is always so eager to get to God, as if it were his stop on the train ride. Events are like perfect poems—matchless. For the Second, the Holocaust is perhaps an extreme example, the consummate pogrom, but only made major by improvements in technology. Besides, there’s always the Gulag to rival it. After all, forty million RIP’d during the Period in Question. Of course, the uniqueness of events cannot be described in language, perhaps they cannot even be experienced; whereas, if everything in history is some sort of repetition, then maybe only a ten-minute slice will satisfy our needs.
    When I was a kid 1 used to be returned to Grand sometimes to spend the summer. The attic was full of Henty and Horatio Alger books. At the bottom of the back stairs hung my grandfather’s pistol in a polished holster, looking so lethal I used to tiptoe past it. My grandfather was chief of the volunteer fire department, and therefore merited a pistol—to shoot looters, 1 suppose—though 1 never saw him wear it. Then just above a pair of boots, huge enough, it seemed to me, to hide in, a sort of loose slicker dangled too—the emptied skin of a nigger. Once in a while the fire bell would ring in the ears of the church, and grandfather would appear clothed like a god, a great bright-bladed ax across his shoulders. Every child in town would run pell-mell after the firemen, who were easy to catch and even pass because they were usually pulling a twowheeled cart whose axle-drum had hoses coiled like jungle snakes around it, or a pumper worked by hand like a seesaw which was used to suck up dousing water from close wells. I particularly recall a fire which occurred in a small shoe repair store one misty morning. The bells rang, we kids flung ourselves like stones into the street, the firemen ran like horses, and the small store smoked like a pile of damp leaves. 1 was disappointed not to see flames, and 1
         can remember watching, both bewildered and amazed, while my grandfather chopped holes in the roof, other men smashed the doors and windows, and still others wet everything and everyone, their hoses pissing languidly in realistic starts and stops, until the whole shop sagged and finally folded in upon itself as though it had been made of slotted cardboard. Of the actual fire, I never saw a lick. It was too elusive and escaped their Homeric whacks. Morning fires never seemed real after that ... an Indian signal sent up in a fog. These amateurs, these volunteers, didn't comprehend combustion, I thought. I felt someone should explain to them that flames weren’t like the limbs of trees to be lopped off from their origins with an ax, however sharp the blade or strenuously swung, but of course I was far too shy; I was awed by the mysteries of the grown-up world at that age, and kept my peace. So after an hour or two of heavy labor, when a pile of shattered boards half smothered in smoke lay charring wealdy along the sidewalk, my grandfather announced the fire’s official finish, and then we all stood around awhile wishing for something really incendiary—for more than smoke to mix in the mist—before letting go our hopes and going home. I knew the owner slightly. Czech, he was the only Jew in town. The creek, though, was as slow and glassy as Grand itself was, and only when you put your hand in, or if you tossed a leaf upon the water, could you tell it was moving. Sometimes dust would shade it, and then the surface seemed a kind of skin, covered with tiny webs and puckers, passing along like an unrolling roll of soiled wallpaper. Not even an occasional waterbug could change your feeling that the bottom was imprisoned. The grocery store smelled of pickles, cheese, and open crackers; the creamery only of cream and churning butter and blue milk, though there were rows of gray-white eggs on which you should have sniffed the sea where all your made-up gulls had been; the butcher shop was redolent with blood and sausage spices, the bakery of yeast and warm bread and wax paper, the blacksmith shop of horses, leather, shade, and metal-sizzled water. I should have expected, from that burned-out store, the reek of thongs and rubber, a smoke black as polish, the acetylene hiss of volatile oils; but it was all low and gray-headed—the smoke—carrying, as far as I could tell, only the odor of pissed-on paper. Later I rescued a thin-headed hammer with blackened handle from the ruins, and I used it the remainder of that summer to set off giant caps, aiming blows which left red paper sticking to the sidewalk as though each bang had bled.
           Bill, he begins. (What a Billywilliam I’ve become to Herschel; what a fall from William Frederick Kohler, Herr Professor, Man of Note.) I hope you will, he says, in that big new book of yours . . . Herschel smiles like a thirty-watt bulb; he has no book, not even a little one; he has a wee M.A. from a wee-er school; the pity of others has tenured him, and he holds on by relaxing every
   grip, assistant professor forever, teaching courses of the lowest number, shallow surveys of Western Civ—history as photo’d from the moon. The world is full of Herschels: little sparse-haired gray-eyed men who never make the news, even as a molecule in a mob. They pass through history like water through a comb. Literally, nothing is known of them. Bill, he begins. In your long one, Bill, I hope you will consider giving . . . How right he is, from Mad Meg’s point of view, for it is the historian who gives—who takes and gives—while history itself just suffers and receives. As all my memories. Bill, he begins. Bill, I’m sure it’ll be—ah—great as it is large (yes, he’s smiling shyly, holding me by my name, as Tabor did, lest I get away). Could you consider giving . . . giving the big men more weight—1 mean more attention, you know—than you did in your first. I felt . . . (Herschel feels! It’s indecent, as if he's undressing in my presence.) I felt you were a trifle inclined then, though I may be wrong—yes, I probably am—but didn't you stress the common man a bit more than perhaps he . . . His voice goes out like a blown match. Poor Herschel—pauvre, pcrvero, pobre . . . Even in my books he hopes he and his friends will remain unremarked and unremembered, that no one will recognize or record them, and it brings him to the fearful edge of criticism. He’s a can of Dr. Scholl’s. . . dieser armer Mann. I shall sprinkle him out. Little? small? common?—like Culp, the zizzler? So he ends. Piff-poof. Herschel ends, ends Herschel.
                              A sensitive Nazi at Auschwitz was annoyed by rabbinical outfits.
                                     These habits retard the melting of lard,
                          which is the reason for being of Auschwitz.
     In the park a grove of oaks and beeches with a bandstand; in the parlor a piano with a lidded bench containing sheets of music (“The Trail of the Lonesome Pine,” "Song of India,” others); in the living room long foaming sofas and a minuscule TV. I think 1 see black shapes on that glass ground. I give the screw a final twist and the dime flips from my hand, skips away, rolls away, ringing like my nerves. My wife will think a student’s torn my shirt in her passion. They all have a passion for fat these days and want a man with a girlish bosom, nipples they can gnaw on, a belly they can pound and knead—was your mother the passive partner in your parents’ marriage?—and the fat man’s small cock hidden out of sight in his thighs like the lady from Ghent who revealed when she bent; oh, they want a weight to ride on, haw and gee, god damn them, and you too, Lou, you bitch, you bawd, you dehomered Helen, you soft stuffed toy (who rules more sternly than the teddy bear?), ahead of me in every feeling, wiser, dark and fair
       as a forest on a sunlit evening (what is all this shit about leaves and light?), innocent as a hankie, honest as Christmas wrapping, female faggot, fanny fucker, whore, nag, bore, bawd, bitch, Lou, you too, love—you! and in the park a simple ceremony of maples, a single elm in the center like a fountain, and the lady-fingers snapping rapidly—acciaccatura—against the whootling of my father’s cornet in Ftodfej/'S   (I®(Ml, as later, in Ohio, he bugled for the Legion. I
       cannot breathe. It is too quiet. Then the scream, the groan—which was it? I listened as 1 listened in the tunnel. No mistaking... a groan, a scream, a moan below me somewhere down the empty steps lit by their own laziness for safety, the rails precipitous, walls slick, paths of crushed rock trailing through the trees, a speech by the mayor about America, polite applause amid the cannon crackers, and the young girls with their asses on casters, boy-bottomed, bodies I was mostly indifferent to, and unringing red bells in the ice cream, bells the flavor of strawberry, the size on slot machines, I carefully spooned around, 1 liberated, freeing them forever from vanilla, and young girls with cherry bombs between the tines of their thighs, and in their fists small flags fluttering down the steps to the floor below me, the building a riddle of worm halls, and the young girls with their crisp dresses dragging, and packs of dogs we scattered with grenades, girls flaunting their naked clothing—how silent the skin is, the flesh is, growing—popcorn, banners, parades below me, someone is groaning, is unmistakably pained, and I listen to the oratory, 1 strain toward the sound, and with firecrackers send tin cans booming from the muzzle of my pipe-long mortar,
       I tilt the halls toward heaven like a battery of barrels: (^OW^f^OwTjji^Owr) remember the glow and the smell of punk? the satisfying fizzle oftKe fuse? the stunned air after? there is no question but those noises changed the color of the sky, shook it so it rained. My grandfather met the trains. The station smelled of creosote and timbers, and the rails were radiant all summer. On the bed of his truck he hauled away huge crates made of fragrant soft cream-colored fuzzy wood as nude as you were as you calmly lay across the spread awaiting me and yet were moist and ready when 1 reached you; so I’ve seen some paintings of a beauty so supreme they drew the fingers to the pigments, not to touch their surface, but to sink inside them, and had Christ walked within the water I’d believe, nor is there any better symbol for the single longing of my life than the penetration which your body begged and I supplied that single summer, and afterward remember how I trembled . . . trembled ... for I knew ... I knew I could go on no longer, could not continue, could not. . . could not like a pond its water hold these feelings as the light was held by the pines in our window, their arms around the Aether—for me, for Newton—proof . . . proof there was another medium through which, at any time, if we were physical enough to be a spirit, we could feel, could enter, Lou-like, free as a strawberry bell from
   vanilla forever. And on that night of breaking glass in Germany, when the windows of the Jews were being smashed, when I was caught up in the excitement, infected by the frenzy too, by the joyous running through the streets, until my arm was lifted and 1 hurled a brick myself, I thought of the flash of my grandfather’s ax, shattering the shingles of that poor Czech’s roof, although my brick sailed through a jagged hole, I hope, and fell somewhere in the store without a sound—in fact with so much silence that, despite the hubbub in the neighborhood, I heard no groaning, heard no screams from any of my other selves as, after the girls with their heavenly haunches had stirred me, or that woman on wheels had, after all that labor on my work had worn me out, 1 heard them just below me in the building. 1 sat on the edge of the bed . . . yes, trembling, you remember. My belly sagged pathetically, and the rag rug rested my stupid feet. I remember. And I've thin arms despite my weight. How could I believe in happiness? How could l, who loved you physically, believe in your love? Those perfect hands enclosing my imperfect penis, those slender fingers, pale tapered nails; they had to be the tools of a professional, a bawd, those moist eyes and parted lips were lies. Lou, weren’t you supposed to be a bed tent, too? where 1 could hide as I hide in Herschel? How could 1 believe that if I squeezed it evenly our new-laid love, like the egg, would demonstrate its strength? with thighs which widened when I sat like soft tires? No. It was simply too good to be, as the old saw says. Happiness has no friend in time, in history; it has no friend in me. Some prisoners cannot bear release, Lou; they've lived too long in climates of concrete; they know that happiness is just a priest who reads us words of consolation while we walk up the steps to the hangman. Yet we’d be suicides without that low intoning, without silly things like flowers, sentimental handclasps, helpless babies, the bodies which charm us. We are used to these, we demand them, as we expect foolery from a clown or deception from a magician. Would the condemned man know he was going if they came with whips? if they left behind, in the office of the executioner, the grave faces of the witnesses, the pleasantries of prayers, the dark dress, the black book, beads? and so the Jews, who knew they were destined for death—death could scarcely have surprised them—could not believe in their own murders when managed in this manner, for such ceremony as they had come to count on was removed; it was so open, more matter-of-fact than even brutal, so fearless, honest, unemotional—so sincere—like spraying for mosquitoes; it so clearly transcended all excuse, it did away with reasons. On that splendid disdain for subterfuge, they flew—the Nazis (O hear me, Herschel!); they rose as gods from the graves of their middle-class lives; anointed, they left their little businesses behind, the normal world with all its petty laws, for sainthood. These laws, these rules, these lies which lips at least for centuries had served—they did not need them;
          they were so self-contained, so internally secure, they were above even the ancient hypocrisies of heaven; and they lived in the realm of the spirit, of der Heilige Geist, as they’d been taught by their religions and philosophies; what were bodies? meat and bones to be disposed of: new grinders and new ovens, new gases and mass graves (as large as lakes, as long as rivers), a raw material calling for a new technology, new plants and processes, a fresh imagination, fresh inventions; what were bodies compared to principles, and what were principles compared to destiny, the Reich’s will, and history’s aim? More theoretical, therefore, than most men, they did not dream, they saw, foresaw; they left the dreaming to the Jews, who did—they dreamed—like drummers marching at a cannon. The one-thousand-year Reich was a State to be constructed, just like happiness, out of time, like the millennium of the Marxist. No angels from on high or demons from below with fiery swords or flaming forks came to balk them. Nature punishes gluttony, not avarice or hate. To Nature it’s most important that you get a good night’s sleep. No. Only further murders—theirs—prevented them from murdering further, as we flew bombers to Japan and powdered them to peace . . . god willing. I am sloppy, pudgy, like someone who has stuffed himself with sweets—a child, preserved in ice, the years blue-streaked and gleaming coldly. Thus when I heard the groans below me (screams, groans, which?), I quickly left my office and the building, fluttered like a moth down the stairwell, so slippery with light, and drove out of their hearing in my Dodge.
ERE ONCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS THERE ONCE WAS A YOU
OM CRESTLINE A YOUNG MAN FROM CLEVELAND A YOUNG
                         When I hear the bursting of the rockets, my hearing makes no noise; when I see the sky, my seeing’s silent; consciousness, just like the dead, is also quiet.
          So quiet. Am I any less indifferent and a coward if the voice I failed—the moan I ran from—was a phantom . . . was my own? My brick passed through that window like a ghost. I never heard it land. I was simply never fated to break glass. That’s why, Lou, I couldn’t continue us. And that’s why windows are important to me.
                Blackboard I I
                          I understand that nowadays some of them are even green. Mine were made of slate and washed each night, after the erasers had been clapped. Chalk
       would sometimes cause the board to scream as if it had been cut to the quick.
       1 would say to the class, Now we know that the distinction I’ve been making is truly carving reality at the joints. Even this weak witticism would return a smile to their pained faces.
         Sometimes, impatient to correct, 1 would simply wipe a word away with a sweep of my hand, the side white then, as if it were the glove on a clown.
         Three spaces matter in my life; they are my Trinity: the pane of the window, the white of the page, and the black of the board. I would like to have said, the body of my beloved, but I can't.
         As a student I stared at it while the teacher was talking. As a teacher 1 turn to it whenever I am at a loss for words, or when I want to make a point, get a thought included in the students’ notes, even when I want to examine the fundamental field of some mental calculation. As useful as it is in these several ways, none of them is the source of its fascination for me. The board is at once the surface of a pit-black sea and a bleak opening onto all our inner spaces. It is the brink of what we are, and hence a horror; nevertheless it is so simple, unassuming, so solid as a symbol, that the feeling it gives me is one of reassurance, because the blackboard is made of dynamic distances, yet its locations run in place, unlike a window which is always full of the flitter of images, and unlike the page, which is flat and unmusical, slow to change, often indelible, its purity slick and shiny, its invitation easy and shallow.
         Furthermore, paper and glass are fragile, while the board is a piece of stone, brittle perhaps, but redoubtably hard, its layers of primeval mud, earliest sand, and volcanic dust compressed by the weight of mountains for a million years; whereas the chalk, like it an element of earth, is almost talc soft, limelike and sedimentary, made, 1 prefer to think, of the minute remains of marine animals, although those creatures shaped the cake cliffs, 1 guess, and not the little pencils of powder with which 1 draw the Kaiser’s family tree or spell out Deutsches Nachrichtenbiiro on the board.
         To me, the board has always been profoundly three-dimensional, an effect enhanced by the chalk dust which drifts up from the tray, or is inadequately removed when the slate is washed, so that its normal blue-black monochrome is full of subtle variations, grays which suggest faraway galaxies or a nebula's gaseous clouds. And when I begin to draw a line across a freshly cleaned section, my hand follows the chalk in, as though like fish it swam there, and then, in the curve of an encircled word, it returns toward its source, and the simpler surface of the classroom world. That may be one reason why 1 lose my way while spelling the most common terms, for the letters will not remain in a row on the same plane as they do on the page, but sink or rise or float away, becoming curlicues and bows of string, whorls of suspended weed in which 1 lose all sense of the word’s original identity.
             This almost wet night is what I see when I close my eyes and wait for the afterimages to recede. It is the theater of consciousness. Here music makes its notes form phrases in a foreign tongue, unintelligible but meaningful. Here all my thoughts parade and pictures hang. Here I set my dreams. 1 am sure everyone has such a hollow in their head, and 1 imagine each has an importance to its owner that’s equal to mine, but I should be surprised if anyone else looks at a blackboard and sees there a “mine” field, one’s arena of empty awareness . . . waiting whatever thoughts the brain will bring it, whatever perceptions the world will share, feelings the body will provide—words and lines, and illustrations—and where the traces of long-erased desires still lie like shadows beneath an overlay of public chalk.
             For two decades the blackboard has stood stolidly before me, and for three more it has mostly stood silently behind. I’ve pulled down maps like shades across a pane, or occasionally colored areas of it in—green, or pink, or yellow— and a movie screen, a time or two, has shown Triumph of the Will or some Dachau-to-Auschwitz footage. I have dealt in that time with cracked boards and surfaces somehow permanently stained with puffs of pale gray dust like a badly silvered mirror, and had to wipe away the traces of another discipline with inadequate erasers. Once I even used, with comical success, a few logical computations left over from a class in baby logic. What a familiar annoyance it was: to look down at the chalk tray and see only nubbins lying like butts in their ash. I remember the fingered holders which drew staffs like a rake across sand, and pieces of frayed string with which one swung arcs and almost-completed circles. There were T-squares and triangles too, back in my grade school days, when notices and the names of those to be kept after school were printed in less-used upper corners, and left there all day to remind and reprove, within line-enclosed fields marked save.
             Der Klassenzimmer—my little hall of holding forth, my lecterned isle, my minds to mold, my self-infatuated space—my schoolroom with, in the early days, its rows of bolted, and then, when the libertarians took over, slightly askew, chairs—has to be my habitat, my thicket of concealment, my nesting place. I have lived much of my life in its predictable atmosphere: the faintly run-down, gently untidy look such rooms customarily have, the light which always pours in from the windows which invariably open up one side, as if the building were tipped, and the overhead globes coloring it a bit, so that classroom illumination has its own jaundiced mix; and how well I know the tattered blinds, too, crooked and chipped, the long scuffed wall opposite the windows, where the corridor goes, broken only, when the room reaches its uninteresting end (against which the blackboard in the next classroom rests), by the customary access door and pane of frosted glass, a dark number in the middle of
       its business like the ID on an athlete. There are generally three of those oak-crate, shellac-yellow, one-armed, paddle-heavy chairs on either side of a central aisle which might run eight rows back: forty ninnies and eight wiseguys, we always said, but proper design had decreed that no student was to be seated very far to the left or right, nor should the center be too deep (despite the fact that eye contact was the only kind officially permitted), even though the front rows were always the last filled, and were where I hoped girls with negligent thighs would try to balance their books, comb their hair, and take notes at the same time.
          It would be natural for me to feel comfortable in these surroundings, to fee! a certain affection for my tools, even to become aware of them only in a subliminal way, or use them up without any appreciation of their individuality, and cast them aside for others, as when a piece of chalk breaks and you unfeelingly slip a fresh stick from the box, or when you let your lines pass cracks without a thought for the slate’s age or condition or eventual fate—are they ground up, I wonder?—because the chalk wears out its life against the board, and its dusty powder is pressed into the packing of the eraser only to be buffeted loose in a bash of clapping and carried off by a dispersing breeze (so, when pounding erasers it is wise to extend the arms and stand well in the lee); although I used to bang them so fiercely against the walls of the school or the cement of the walks, when I was sent to clean them as a kid, they made prints as if by strange feet, or prints as if by strange palms; and it was then that the chalk would break up into particles individually blown away or worn off by the wind, bits which were a moment before the track of some weird beast, and before that, perhaps, an atom in the makeup of a word, a word which might have served a thought, even named a style, or an era, or a system.
          For the appearance of a mark in the space of the slate was only temporary, little I knew was more so, except perhaps what lovers penciled in the sand with a stick or their fingers, baking their bodies first in the sun and next in one another's, then inscribing their names at the beach’s edge and waiting for the on-rushing water to cleanse them of a connection they did not realize they were ready to renounce; or perhaps what the skywriters wrote in the sea-beach sky itself: the names of products and passions both dissipating like an outcry of birds against an incessant surf. Chalk was made to be removed, the board was built to remain; its world was a world of erasure and revision, of outlines and summaries and unfamiliar names; not even what was penciled onto paper was expected to vanish precisely because it was put there; and I loved that about its space—that life-limit—so that even an enclosing line, even the plea of “save" would not preserve a mark much longer than a day; nor was it a place for first notes, rather for last ones, since few thoughts found themselves con-
           strueted in its yard; no, it was a realm of reminder, a place to announce an idea, to encapsulate a period, to make a joke, to write "Heil Hitler,” hardly witty, on what the students called the “Bill Board” (though they thought 1 didn’t know), and then to wait for the teacher to wipe away a sign, a slogan, with a wet rag, or that shout they had never heard seriously shouted, to remove it from public sight and the arena of nervous regard.
             The students are also amused by my habit of clapping my own hands to get the dust off, of leaning back against the slate and streaking my ass with chalk, or whitening the edge of a coat sleeve as my arm smears what my fingers scribble. There are even distinctions to be made between those, like Planmantee, who erase primly back and forth, not exceeding greatly the marks to be eliminated, and those who, like Governali, employ a motion as broadly circular and thrashy as history itself, or those, like Herschel, who swipe gingerly at their adversary and end only by placing a gray fog over ever)' easily reachable area.
             Mad Meg paced, even scooted, while he talked, whereas 1 tend to drape myself rather heavily over the lectern or, my back to the board, timidly inch along the edge of the chalk tray, causing, of course, that amusing line to be drawn. These quirks are regarded by the students as endearing, and one more irrelevancy they can focus on while the central issue blurs and the point in question blunts.
             What 1 wonder at is the way in which such objects assume an enormous significance in my life. They are like catch-basins and would collect me if 1 were rain. It is in these places that 1 find myself again, as if the image in the water were really made of water, and were really in the puddle where it seems to be. Proust’s little shell-shaped cake reminded Proust of pages, but all that M remembers hurries him farther away from that smell, that taste, the teatime that started it off, toward earlier circumstances, other days, each as different from the source of their recall as button from bell; nor would one ever find, in Odette's perfume, the haunt of the madeleine’s odor, or, in poor Swann, an appreciation of its smell. 1 assume we all associate, if none of us do it as well, moving along old tracks from place to place in our past like a memory-driven train; but history, as 1 especially feel it, deposits itself inside its surroundings— in objects, unlike actions which are marked by being almost immediately over—in things which hang around the way the corpse does after the hanging's done, as the earth does over the criminal’s grave, and the rope itself, which feels its own burns in abraded places—in things, unlike thoughts which shed their individuality and immediately swim away into anonymity, becoming so many figures, so many fish, so many electromagnetic waves—in my mother’s rings, my aunt’s nested boxes, my father’s car—in the dregs of every day where my life composts itself—rots, warms, blends, bursts into flame—in a photograph, a dollop of honey, bit of burnt toast, or in all other toasts and dollops
        which seem identical (although how many honeys have been licked from Lou’s navel?), in uncapped tubes of toothpaste, in rime on grass and leaves, in—in short—things seemingly trivial, things set aside or overlooked, things apparently passing which nevertheless abide in either themselves or their duplicates; only in such debris, however, as has been made over from matter into mind, because one is never carried away out of the neighborhood of these redolent things, but is rather drawn into them, enters them carrying a torch or wearing a light as into a mine; so that everything a blackboard does to remind me of my childhood, my pupil days or my profession, tells me about the blackboard too, tells me about chalk and me, geometry and me, erasers and dull walls and windows and me, swastikas and myself (concerning both I’ve more than once made a clean slate); for history, I do believe, is not a mighty multitude of causes whose effects we suffer now in some imaginary present; it is rather that the elements of every evanescent moment endeavor to hitch a ride on something more permanent, living on in what lives on, lengthening their little life by clinging to a longer one, and in that manner, though perhaps quite unintentionally, attaching what will be to what still is (and so far has survived) the way a word’s former employments are the core of what it presently means—because a word’s history is what the word is, its future an encrustation like a cloak of bark—and lurking beneath its present use, holding it up into the light of nowadays, is the Hercules of all it’s been; for if you are a little cloud of clapped dust, though you were to know that the matter you are made of is eternal, it helps you not at all, as a cloud already dissipating as a cloud does, to continue to exist, no, you must somehow entrance the eye of your creator, be realized and remembered in a mind; be, indeed, a pesky cloud about to blow back over your clapper’s hands and arms and hair, and hence into the memory of a retreating step, a sneeze, a fanning of the hand, into a memory to which its link with language may one day bring you back, perhaps at the sight of another pat of powder, a puff like the puff you’d been before, before you became an expression, an image, and therefore understood, on this fresh occasion which you now invest, to be the dust of a few wiped-away words, returning to the nowhere from whence they came; to be the residue of all such words, written where writing is fugitive; to be the ash of speech itself, the fate of what-ever’s said, since to be airborne is to be powder like a cloud; and then, of course, to mark the persistent mutability of all things: of matter whose forms are famously protean, of mind which must find an ear to speak in, or the space of a page or a slate on which to write—write what? those meanings which must await a breath, or have to live in lines of ink, or must trust their fate to a stick of chalk; yet walk away in a student's rented head, someday maybe to be an accomplished mind; consequently, as the blackboard clouds and screeches its
          umlauted vowels, I can still see there, beneath fresh scribble and old smear, the parallelograms and triangles I have drawn while trying to prove a theorem for Miss Mason, the middle-aged old maid who taught me geometry in fifth grade, and who opened and closed doors with a hankie held in her hand to protect herself from her pupils’ germs.
             So when 1 lean on the lectern on some first day, and speak to my class, these students, this space, this podium, the chairs, the rows, the room, the scattered stacks of books and papers, the gloomy eager drowsy faces, the slightly soiled floor, the oddly tempered light, moted by the dust the students’ shoes have stirred, the blackboard I know is behind me, black as space without a star, and empty as emptiness never quite is, awaiting, as they are, as 1 am, the beginning of our Course (a course through a cursed time), that is to say, awaiting words . . . certain words . . . words I shall have said before . . . then all other and aforetime books and desks and faces and floor and dust-flocked air and lips and hair and light eyes are there too—roomed as well as we, seated sweetly, uneasily, wearily—not as some external recollection to be pasted to the present class, but as the sense and center of what I and we and these things are, and so the clue to what these things, we, and I will do; for my present self, my slouchy figure, is but a another use of me in the many sentences which compose a Time, and so it is for the students here who have found their place, once more, in the syntax of the schoolroom. And if you know the sort of sentences we have performed in before, the way you know the words of your language, then you will know what we, here, altogether, mean; but if you know only Cynthia, Frank, and Mary (and who knows so much?), and cannot recognize or read the rest, then welcome to history, a text where, possibly, every thirtieth word seems clear.
             Historical attention is like needle and thread going in and out of the holes of a button, fastening A to B only by passing through both many times; for first the blackboard is a thing, and then a sign, and then the sign’s a thing again with that selfsame sign inside, and then a sign once more before it sees itself become slate space, chalk cloud, word world, my public scratch pad, lecture points, my miseries in math class, the great graffito caper—Miss Mason’s bare ass depicted sticking out a window—her slow erasure of the image—the remnants of the lines, however, all the more bawdy, all the more eloquent—and then her spitting on the traces, spitting and wiping with her hand, spitting while standing kiss close to the stone, spitting hard as if expelling a bug with her food, while we watch in a silence bluer and more brittle than the board— finally turning to face us, only her soiled hand shaking, standing staring straight over our heads, before saying finally . . . finally . . . finally . . . “Open your books to page eighty-four."
             In true history, word-thing-thought-and-memory are bound, then, like a buttoned button to a sleeve, with a little thread left over for the deed.
         My eyes turn to the board as they once did when 1 sat in class and dreamed, entering outer space, passing systems of stars in a blink, or imagining regions of the world which awaited their maps to be finally real, or drawing with my mind’s eyeline the belovedly rendered buttocks of Miss Mason, over and over, until there was nothing to see there but ocean, nothing but waves.
                   Kristallnacht
         My most memorable window-watching took place in an apartment furnished me by an inevitably ancient German institution of higher learning during a brief period of research I was undertaking on the festive and calamitous events of November ninth to tenth in that yearlong night numbered nineteen hundred and thirty-eight.
         My rooms were three-quarters of a story up crumbling concrete stairs, while the object of my scrutiny, as it would turn out, was the semi-sunken bedroom of an apartment across the alleyway from mine. In a sense, 1 felt I was looking in on my own digs, because both buildings seemed made entirely of basements: grimy, gray, featureless, vaguely moist, and grimly decrepit, as though each wall were willing its own indifference. The window 1 would watch from was set just above my tiny kitchen’s minuscule sink. It had been half curtained once, and though the curtain still hung from its rod, the lace it aped was by then but a lost ghost in the glass. When 1 turned the tap marked Hot, dark red rust ran out. Over—I supposed—years, it had ringed the drain and stained every chip in the bowl’s previous porcelain as if a crime had been committed so incarnadine—a word often on my mind—its tint could not be removed from even the instruments of its concealment.
         Vertically latticed shutters served as shades for the window of the opposite apartment, and when they were closed, of course, 1 could see nothing but the gray sides of their slats. It was a warm and humid time of year, however; one welcomed any sort of moving air, even if it came down the alley over cans of trash and colorful slicks of motor oil; so, for the most part, the bedroom window would be raised and the blind drawn back into itself like something shy. It was not—this now immodest room—an utterly open book, for 1 could only see, from where I lurked behind my inlaid linoleum countertop and modest sink, three-quarters of a double bed, much floor, which was coarsely covered by a soiled and trodden cotton rug, a simple wooden chair, and the skirt or trouser-half of any person standing in the room, waiting for someone, perhaps, loosening a belt, looking in a mirror, remembering a neglected task, a former time.
              On the bed there were two bolsters, each brief as a head—twin tubes whose ends were flustered by a gathering of cloth much as a pair of party favors often is—but behind them 1 could only see a single pillow which lay neglected without a case, hair stains on its muslin the size of a brush of paint. The light in the room was harsh; every shadow was deep and sharp, as if made by a bare bulb, but I could not spot its source. Garish as the window’s image was, 1 didn't notice it for several days, washing my few cups and plates in ignorance of the pictures very possibly parading before me, one fist filled by a sordid wet rag, the other clutching a saucer really suited for a dog’s dish rather than my evening egg, eyes idly at rest on the basin’s ruddy traces of an otherwise bygone crime.
              Then one evening, cut by the shutter, one bare buttock and a length of stocky leg appeared, standing in half a puddle of olive-drab pants. Shortly a sliver of torso topped by half a head, curly as a poodle, came into view. Finally, out from behind that sliver slipped a right arm, muscled as a workman’s would be, free of artwork but darkly haired all the way to the knuckles of its heavy hand. This arm was holding something—a woman’s purse, 1 surmised. The kind we call a clutch. Its surface shimmered. Perhaps it was beaded. 1 put my rag down as if to make a suggestion to the image, but this body, which had obviously been bending before, now stood steadfastly upright through a lapse of many seconds, each moment lengthened by my eagerness to see more, the purse at arm’s length and mid-thigh, yet held resolutely as though it were the figure’s only clothes. To verify my feeling, the leg deftly kicked the fallen pants aside with its foot—the missing trouser crossed my view as the clothing flew— so that the garment landed near the chair as if aimed there. Upon a command 1 couldn’t hear, a sturdy stance was immediately restored. After a little interval in which my breathing seemed to be the equivalent of his, this slender fragment of a man vanished from sight as suddenly as he had so partially come, as did the room’s brash illumination.
              My spirit flung itself down in disappointment, half-drowned hands trying to revive themselves on the towel which dried my dish. I, too, had become a fraction. I was now no more than my attention, and my attention was entirely turned to what, in the failing light, was a smooth slate-colored blank like a classroom blackboard cleaned by the janitor overnight. Today, how little I retain of the rest of that evening, blotted out by the merest snippet from another life, snagged in an unexpected glimpse, too, like a bit of debris pulled up from a pond at the end of an angler’s line.
              Ffad he been facing me (and 1 could not be sure, from the configuration of the room, whether this was likely), 1 should possibly have seen a part of his privates, the ding side of his dong, perhaps, half of a weenie before you’ve slathered it with catsup, though surely not as red, not as red over all, but only the head red, or half
       the head, as far as I would be able to determine it, would be red, if it were circumcised, which was unlikely, since the Germans had sent most of those guilty of ritual barbarism to their reward, and used such decapitations, in fact, as a distinctive sign of Semitism, so that any patriotic German parent would certainly be concerned to spare their babyboys the pain of this mutilation, with its attendent trauma, too, a womanizing of the male only palely disguised as purifying, although the man might have conceivably retracted his foreskin before he turned, inadvertently displaying his cock to me as though it had been cut, a cock I imagined rather thick and short, since the man seemed to be, in that short moment of peeking permitted me, somewhat thick and short himself.
         On the other hand, he had a great deal of black hair on his arm, leg, and back, not simply on his richly knotty head; consequently he may have been a foreigner like myself—well, of course, not like myself because my skin is as smooth as a sheet of paper, dry like paper too, and so white as to seem without life, waiting to flush with feeling as though scribbled on from within—yet like myself lodged in a strange bare room, alone with only my own boring body for pleasure, and, in his case (here’s another difference) not even the treat of a brief peekaboo, because the single way he’d see my ass, even any half, would be if 1 took a sitz bath in my dinky sink—not bloody likely—then again (another difference) he might have a woman with him in the room, how would 1 know? and was kicking his body free from his clothes, ready to take the plunge, how could I know?
         No time for tears. His butt might show up again. Yet not that night. 1 would read a spell—documents made of dried blood—and then drift by the sink like some nancy on the prowl, hoping for a body shot, a slice of some scene, however slight, I could call life, only to find a darkness which a dim light at the end of the alley relieved, so that sometimes a shape would seem to drift through the glass when there was but a bit of grime fixed there instead, responding to the passing of my gaze. Back to the file. A futile circle through the kitchenette. Back to the file."... Those who couldn’t walk were beaten until the road was wet with their blood.” Another go-round. 1 became impatient with my victims, as 1 so often did. The window did not grant me a reprieve from my work. Sleepiness did. Soon my own dim light, seeping into the kitchenette from the sitting room, and then, ever more wanly, washing across the alley and against its far window, went out. However, clearly sleepy only when I read, 1 lay on my cot a long while, reviewing details, especially that muscle in the buttock of my snapshot which seemed to have been clenched, was it not? before my mind followed suit and lost thought.
         No time for tears on the bloody road. Pick yourself up, pa, and let’s get on, they will beat you into the pavement where you’ve fallen if you don’t move
           along to Poland, to the place where you will be expelled like a painful fart in the face of the Poles who won’t want you either but who won’t beat you bloody just yet; will instead let you and your kind collect like drainwater, thousands taken to the stables in a tiny country town to be reborn as horseshit; and someone said sign here you are being deported, sign here you are being assembled, sign here you are being taken to the station, sign here you are going “all aboard,” sign here in order to walk down the road to the border, sign here to signify you have been well treated and have received bread which you have discourteously refused for lacking crust and kosher, sign here to signify that Poland—your come-from country—has received you with open underarms, sign for your space in the smelly stable, for your bit of stubble in the open field, your eventual bullet in the head.
              I was always absent from my room during the day, lodged in a library carrel instead of doing my duty at the watching window, though 1 felt unwelcome in those stacks like a something stuck between the teeth—that foreign, lorn, and seedy too—among those reluctant documents which hard-faced minions brought to me after long delays like soup by a waiter, and then hurriedly hauled away on any excuse to the lockers where they were kept, not like books certainly, for they weren’t books, these testaments, but like prisoners they liked to keep pent, like lies which might take on the look of truth when exposed to light. Consequently I was always conscious of my loss, if not of actual images, then of my opportunity for having them, though I comforted myself with the thought that my Turk (or whatnot) would be gone to work as I was during the day, so that if I managed to reach my room by five I might expect to see him too, unbuckling the length of his labor like a belt and lying down nude on my three-quarter couch, hair growing down to his pubes, penis languid along a meaty thigh, scrotum loose and relaxed too, brown as a softly rotten peach. For a snooze.
              Cold comfort. 1 could not be certain. He had had his woman, I was sure of that, and he would have had her fully in my line of sight had there been a light to see him screw by, damn and blast; but possibly he was a thief and had snatched the clutch from its owner’s grasp and run from her cries through a relief of streets to safety in his simple room where only my eye found him out; nevertheless, he would not have undressed to the buff and kicked his clothes away as though in a petty thief’s petty huff, simply to count the clutch’s change and guess at his take by feeling for hairpins in the dark. That version of his hidden history wouldn’t do. 1 decided to call him Greenspan after a creature prominent in my research, not a likely name for a Turk, but 1 had given that thought up easily, for he could be a Jew or a gypsy or an Eyetie or a Greek, anybody swarthy, anybody hairy, anybody who had hair on his hands, a satyr, hair grow-
      ing out of his nose, a Caliban, tufts of hair in the opening of his ears, a sedulous ape, a minion of Satan, cowlicked and cloven. He'd be personalized, like stationery. Greenspan because 1 had always struggled with the actual Polish spelling of this historical enigma: Gryn sz pan. Creenspan. Assassin. Jewpole.
         So he’d have a scissored prick. We’ll see, I said, if he ever turns around. If the light doesn’t go, I’ll know. If the Turk returns. If he doffs his clothes. If he faces front. If the light doesn’t go. And I arrive at the right time to rinse my plate of its meager gravy. And he’s there in the glare of the electric. If the shutter isn’t closed. If his cock is capped he can’t be Greenspan, even in my imagination. Fancy must fly no farther from the facts than birds from their territory. It must take care to alter only atmosphere. So ... if the light doesn’t go . . .
         Grynszpan purchased a puny pistol and pointed it at the Third Secretary of the German embassy in Paris, after gaining entrance to the office under false pretenses. He promised the Third Secretary he would avenge the Polish Jews, pulling the trigger five times too, but taking poor, that is, amateur, aim: pop pop pop—it was a twenty-two—pop pop, one pop entering the shoulder of his enemy, whom he didn’t know and had never seen, but no matter, that’s war, the enemy is well known by and large but anonymous in person, one pop, namely number five, entering the groin of vom Rath, now a hero of the Third Reich because pop five ripped through the spleen, grazed the stomach, and struck a lung, not bad for a popgun pointed by a Pole, and it drops vom Rath right enough, though he won’t be dead for three days what with volunteers repeatedly bleeding into him, although I think it’s fair to say that I got only one shot at Mr. Terrible Turk, my renamed Jewpole assassin, the trouser-kicker, and we don’t know yet where I entered him when I entered the open shutter or if I hit him at all—not the fault of my aim, so momentary was the opportunity, so brief the occasion—although I may have put a hole in the purse instead of his head, perhaps in his ass or his heart, and be consequently doomed to perceive, when I dream, a clutter of coins and a smooth round of rouge in the clutch, rather than his lust or a few memories of mother.
         I admit I was slow to recognize the resemblance between my two activities—watching and reading. When I dug into the data about Grynszpan, looking through his family tree for a few loose fruits and lining his murderous path through Paris with spectators sufficient for a parade, wasn’t I peering into his privacy too, unbeknownst to him or his shade? and isn’t all the evidence I gather no more than a sliver, a fraction of the facts; for I don’t know either the weight of the Turk s foot on the threadbare rug or what the rug feels when it’s walked upon, nor do I know the true contents of the clutch, or even if it is one, or where it came from or where it went or what it portends, nor can I guess the name of the billowy lady who services him and whether she studies the ceil-
           ing—its cracks, flecks, and specks—while they screw, or whether she has a rule about how far from the mattress she will let her hips rise in response to his churnings, or anything of Grynszpan’s heart as he prepared to sacrifice himself for what had become almost overnight his Cause (or did the data support a more extended commitment to violence on behalf of the plight of the Jews?), it’s anybody’s guess, including one’s stab at the age of the chair which sits in the room like a lonely lodger, or one’s conjectures concerning the kinds of acts which muscled him, the genes which haired him like a teddy and buried a revelatory rhyme behind an elliptical referent.
             Because nobody’s that bare. Beauty is never bare either, contrary to the poem which claims that Euclid did an elder on her. Yes sir, the Turk was so hairy I might have thought the whole of him to be a giant’s privates, like those furry twats which hide a secret with such ineptness as to call attention to nothing that would ever be noticed if the hair were not there so self-evidently concealing it.
             The window I watched through now, the window which yielded me nothing, evening after evening, night after night, dawn upon dawn, was also every window 1 had ever known, whether real or metaphorical: that was one reason my gaze was so persistent and intense; because it was not merely curiosity or prurience which shifted my neutral into stare, it was, as it always is of course . . . complicity. The kind of complicity which normally interests me is, if you like, spiritual: when, at any distance of space and time, the soul of someone accompanies the actual agent as he does the deed, or permits it to happen because it secretly suits him, although the complicitor is too squeamish to imagine himself in the actor’s place, or when a person prefers to cultivate her garden although others are going to wrack and ruin—that kind of complicity 1 know a lot about; but normal complicity, actually going along with, agreeing to, or even helping out, is not in my line, because I am basically not a company man, or very brave, or driven by practical convictions, or in any way touched by the touching belief that essentials can sometimes be changed, that change itself is ever more than superficial; nevertheless, 1 must admit, there’s been one bit of history-making to which I have—in a most minor and irrelevant way, of course—lent a hand . . . lent, I should say, in a literal sense, as if circumstances had borrowed my assistance, and forgot to bring it back.
             And am 1 now ashamed? Did 1 feel guilty when I went to the window, hoping to see something salacious on my stage? was 1 ashamed of my fanciful elaborations, my Turk, his flame, or the idea that on the next day the lady from whom he had snatched the purse caught sight of him on a nearby street and boldly accosted him there, in the doorway of the Postal Service, so that to quiet her he confessed his crime and agreed, in return for her continued silence (or,
      if you like, for her complicity in the cover-up), to give back all her property in the same condition in which she had clutched it, and that, by making such a promise, the Turk persuaded her to accompany him the two blocks to his room in order to recover her handbag and its inhabitants, every item present and "as was" if not wholly untouched by the Turk's inquiring fingers, whereupon, in full view of me, the Turk had taken out his member and put it into the lady’s convenient swoon—another case of complicity perhaps. No. I was not discomfited, although I would have been shamed to have been seen while seeing such sights, or to have been known as someone who thought, who invented, who dreamed such things, whether night or day, yes, it would have embarrassed me to have been in turn watched while 1 turned the Turk around to check on his circumcision. Yes. To have this read by other eyes than mine. Yes. Unless I were dead or a dropout from history.
        G ryn sz pan wanted the plight of his family and other Polish Jews to be brought to the world’s attention. So he shot the Third Secretary—who asked him pohtely to have a seat. A portion of the world paid some slight attention to his feat. More of the world went to his victim’s funeral, or followed the course of the train which carried vom Rath's corpse back through Germany. Hitler and von Ribbentrop attended one memorial ceremony, Baron von Weiszacker and Count von Welczek another. Our hero managed to inscribe vom Rath’s name in the fuller histories of the time. But instead of putting the world wise to the fate of his family (he actually could not have imagined to what monstrosities he was really alerting the general public), Grynszpan only called attention to himself. And instead of helping the Jews, which was clearly his sacrificial intent, he provided the Nazis with a perfect excuse to smash glass, burn synagogues, and loot stores. The consequences of our actions escape our intentions the way cattle stampede at a pistol’s shot, and there are always friends and enemies ready to steer corollaries into their own corrals.
        Who could have envisioned, for example, the result of my brief glimpse of this anonymous man’s bare back? I don't mean my idle musings. These were effects on the soft side, and never grew loud enough to be upshots. I continued my vigil for several weeks, despite the blank I always drew, as if the Turk had left town, or perhaps been merely a visitor to the apartment of his ladylove. But if a visitor, then where was his hostess? Had she gone down to the sea with her sailor, for that was what he was (and I had been instinctively on the right track when I looked for a tattoo), or had they gone off together to a hardware retailers' convention, inasmuch as she was only an accountant in his office with whom he was having a fling after ignoring her for several years because of her thick glasses behind which there was a wonderland of lust and an aptitude for unconventional caresses? Who could have imagined it? 1 don’t mean my
           distracted work on Kristallnacht. Or the accountess's tumultuous interior. Or her digital skills. Which her repetitious fingering of adding machines had perfected. But the fact (made inevitable by my present profession as a voyeur) that 1 would certainly see—and indeed saw—a boy come down the alley in the faint light of its one lamp to soil the Turk’s wall with a swastika—well, 1 only saw the kid gesture (if he was not a kid, he was a dwarf), standing beneath the sill of my picture palace as if intending to take a leak, but strangely waving his right arm instead, back and forth, back and forth, so it was morning before the symbol could be clearly seen: big, black, relatively crisp considering the dark in which the drawing was done and the uneven surface of the wall. In any case, the kid’s calligraphy managed to capture the central message of the emblem.
              When the news of vom Rath’s assassination reached Germany, the Jewish communities there understood at once what would be in store for them. The question I had put to myself, and the question which was governing my present research, came to this: if the German Jews knew so well what the consequences of such a murder would be, wouldn’t Grynszpan have realized it too (for he was not an utter fool, indeed his interrogators credited him with considerable sense), and if he did know, and went ahead, did that mean he was simply consumed by the desire for instantaneous revenge, however actually futile—in fact, however calamitous—the effects of his vengeance would be; or was he up to something else, the sort of something else which might suggest he was not at all the young zealot he was taken for, and that the Nazis were not just sitting around waiting for an excuse to attack the Jews, but had engaged a provocateur?
              I had seen someone small do a dirty on a wall. Since 1 had no intention of reporting this fact, or basing any action on my information, what made the whole affair seem so important to me that I can remember it in detail these many years later, and place it among the few true epiphanies in my rather lackluster and uninspired life? I think it was important because it proved how inadvertence ruled our roost. A group of Poles of Jewish extraction are expelled from Germany in a typically roughhouse German manner. These Jews no doubt sent many calls for help to friends and relatives elsewhere, among them a note to Herschel Grynszpan from his sister, Berta, informing him of the deportation of his family from Hanover to a camp just across the German border in Poland. An illegal immigrant, Herschel had been lolling about Paris for some time, but the contents of this postcard energized him. He bought a little gun (6.35 caliber, by European measure) and planned to go to the German embassy to shoot the ambassador, crying vengeance and so forth as he did so, thereby bringing the merciful feelings of a multitude to bear upon the problem of these deported Jews.
         That this trivial creature should have been ignited in such a murderous way is sheer happenstance. That he should have been governed by such a grandiose ambition is absurd. That he should have ducked from the arms of his friends, purchased his gun without incident, and reached the office of the Third Secretary with unforgivable ease: none of these circumstances could ever be repeated, they are so open to accident and sheer mischance. And it was surely vom Rath's very bad luck to receive this momentary madman, who does shout something sappy while firing his five shots, although wildly enough he might have been throwing at the Third Secretary a handful of beans. Bad luck, too, that one bullet alone should have struck so many vital organs. Ernst vom Rath was not even a Hitler Nazi, having joined the party before Hitler became prominent in it. As the son of an aristocrat, he cannot have been enamored of the little parvenu in any case. Nevertheless he becomes a martyr to the cause he was killed to impede, and to a cause he did not, with any enthusiasm, endorse.
         Welcome to history. To incident and anecdote, chance and serendipity. To the country of the cruel joke.
         In the few days that followed (for I would soon complete my work and be off for home, household, and unhappiness) and despite the fact that I had observed the boy only from above and nearly in the dark, I kept imagining that 1 saw him in the neighborhood, sweeping the floor of the sausage store, passing by on his bike, making deliveries, stoning mallards in the park. And 1 kept feeling this way even though I knew 1 was reenacting one of my own inventions concerning the Turk. Did 1 think I would threaten the kid with exposure, and in that way bring him to my rooms for a rogering? Ridiculous.
         It would be the Turk who would do that. For 1 had assumed all along that it was a woman for whom the trousers had been taken off and kicked impetuously across the room. But now it was clear. It was to bugger the boy who cowered in a corner out of my sight, shivering with fear and excitement, his little weenie at his age unready, awed by his sight of the Turk in tumescence. And then (it had to have happened) the Turk in due time became bored by the untutored youth; he grew tired of an adolescent’s overly anxious fingerings, and spurned the dear boy’s sexual ministrations, although the kid was now as devoted to them as he had been initially reluctant to take part; so that the child felt abandoned by the only living thing which had ever risen in his presence, had ever shown for him any affection, and with whom the poor baby had had any social success. The painting of the swastika was therefore a scorned lover’s act of revenge, and a way of saying nothing more than something like ‘‘you bastard!”
         Light plays strange tricks. I naturally do my watching in the dark. I am not the unwitting sucker on the stage, nor do I wish to be observed observing. Yet what little illumination is not used up by alleyway or sitting room tends to
            puddle in the sink as if drawn to the kitchenettish porcelain like water to a drain.
              1 feel this pale glow rise like steam to illuminate the bottom of my chin. It makes me uneasy, as if Greenspan or his girl might look out and catch me looking in—at least my chin looking in.
              As vagrant, as tricky, as the light seems to be; as personal as my response to it is when slowly my hands sink toward the bottom of the bowl only to have the basin turn black ahead of them; as local as the thought it suggests: that only the eye can reach out to things without bringing along its shade; as oddly coincidental as the companionship of swastika and lit window are to the ordinary understanding; nevertheless, event, idea, feeling, and phenomena are each controlled by laws more than legal, and explicable down to their final diseases, when the coroner will draw up a complete list of all their ailments, including, of course, both the remote and proximate causes of death.
              Welcome to history. To cause and fate, power and purpose. To the country of the clever calculation and the con. Welcome to conspiracy and criminal connivance. To a world of rig.
              There is, for instance, Grynszpan’s note. If you think of it as his final word to the world, his apologetic adieu, then it is the sort of thing that suicides write or, rather, have written for them by their murderers in order to deceive an obtuse police.
                            My dear parents. I could not do otherwise. May God forgive me. My heart bleeds at the news of 12,000 Jews' suffering. I must protest in such a way that the world will hear me. I must do it. Forgive me. Herschel. I I
             I had to remark the cold collective character of the salutation. I had to consider the Lutheran language which followed, scarcely the phrasing for a Jew to use. I had to weigh the sincerity of the cliche “my heart bleeds," and the feelings presumably attached to the number 12,000. There is not a word to spare for the plight of his parents who are simply swallowed up in a callous lump sum. I had to take into account, furthermore, the I-MY reiteration. The world is not to hear of the crime of the Germans so much as it is to hear of his. Herschel’s parents will have much to forgive, since his relief will not be theirs. Of all the Jews in the world— as a consequence of this killing—only Herschel’s situation can conceivably be enhanced—by notoriety if by nothing else. In short, the note is not convincing.
             Nor is Grynszpan’s final fate reassuring, if we are looking for evidence to support the view that he was simply a heedlessly headstrong and vengeful fa-
       natic. His French trial is postponed, presumably because both prosecution and defense are seeking a favorable climate, while events keep rearranging the winds, changing the public in a trice from temperate to torrid. France is soon overrun, and still Herschel Grynszpan awaits his platform. By now, the particular crime he wished to protest has itself been blotted out by a thousand others, even more malignant. The Jews shall travel a road made muddy by the spill of their blood. Kristallnacht itself will cover his complaint with corpses. Eventually Vichy’s scalawags turn the confessed assassin over to the Nazis, but the Germans also postpone his trial, waiting, as they said, for a politically propitious moment. Oddly enough, the optimal occasion never comes. Grynszpan disappears into the penal system, never to be heard from again. Did he die in one of the camps, or did he survive, as a few believe, and, after the war, assume a false identity?
         It seems unlikely that the boy would have painted a swastika in the middle of the aliey, under the sill of my secret subject, without a special reason, for there are so many places where it would have shown to better effect, nor does the center of this modest passage afford any significantly superior concealment for the deed. It seems even more unlikely that Grynszpan, a Jew against whom the Germans had a legitimate grudge, should have escaped the fate which overtook millions of innocents, unless a bargain had been struck.
         Now, like a subtitle, the swastika comments upon the theatrics of my window, where surely one evening a Fascist farce of some sort will be enacted. These political shenanigans will be inevitably seen by me and then I shall have to decide whether or not to report them. I am not reporting the boy’s vandalism, which makes any other talebearing awkward. We know that Grynszpan was mailed to Berlin where he underwent a suspiciously mild interrogation by the Gestapo. He was then forwarded to Sachsenhausen where he received preferential treatment because Herr Goebbels was planning a sensational trial which would require the criminal’s cooperation. Beatings are a more customary carrot. Grynszpan was brought back to Berlin, after a while, where various lawyers tinkered with the wording of the charges. High treason, rather than assassination, was settled on, and a trial date was set, only to be postponed yet again because another case, believed to be even more newsworthy, would overlap Grynszpan’s and crowd it from its share of newspaper pages.
         There is another view of this business worth special mention, that of vom Rath’s father, Gustav, who maintained to the end of his life that his son had been slain by a paid assassin hired by the Nazis themselves. Why? Because young vom Rath was an aristocrat and too outspoken to be left in a sensitive post.
         And what are we told of Grynszpan’s defense by this time? that he claimed to have killed Ernst Eduard vom Rath in a fit of homosexual jealousy, and not from an excess of religious and racial fanaticism. That is to say, he acted not to
            protest the German treatment of the Polish Jews, but to avenge the treatment of one Jew by one German.
               Welcome to history. To personality and pleasure, immediate motives and margins of profit. To the stealthy operations of the human ego, to vice as the honest and homely vector of events.
               1 received one more blink, lasting but seconds, yet indelible as a laundry mark. A man and a woman, dressed, were standing in the room almost against the bed. According to his curly hair, it was Greenspan the Turk, although each curl had to ooze from beneath the cloth cap he was wearing. He was togged out (that’s the right word) in balloony green trousers topped by a very red shirt, possibly flannel. The shirt and trousers were more than loud, they badly blocked my view of the woman. I was able to register a purplishly puffed sleeve attached to a blouse, part of a flat Slavic face, and an abundance of hair which appeared to be hennaed. Suddenly the blouse backs and turns and the room goes as dark as my hopes.
               Clearly, she has turned off the light to take off her clothes, which she does hurriedly on account of his urging, since he is leaning lustfully over her the entire time she is undressing, getting in her way, trying to help, whispering the name of this garment or hook, that button or snap, as the clothes fall, while fumbling at his own belt and buttons too, somewhat inefficiently on account of his state of distraction.
               It’s like looking into a well, but there’s no water at the bottom of this one, nothing glints or shifts, it is pure pitch all the way to the plate. I swear in exasperation and give the sink a shake, something it is almost possible to do. I could see more in the basin itself than I can discern out there in the obfuscation of the glass. Small mars might seem to move, and drifts of insubstantiality would carnally collide.
               The Jews were required to inscribe their names on the glass fronts of their shops in white letters at least twenty-five centimeters high. Had one of them said                  a paving stone would have made                      of it
            soon enough, and not a single Humpty, however much a boastful master, would be able to spell it together again.
               Yet there was no sign of a string or a switch. I searched my photo file again and again, and of the light’s source there remained not a trace. There had to be more room in that room than 1 could see. 1 was consequently compelled to conclude that on neither of the occasions when that piece of the apartment had come into my view had the “he" or the “she” snapped off the light. There had to be a third man or woman, comprising a chambre a trois; perhaps the room held a lit for three. Which meant, of course, the collapse of every previous hypothesis.
          The hubbub hauled me out of bed. From my student window, I saw people running in the streets. I was hung over and woozy with sleep because 1 had gone to bed late after a long night of talking and drinking, so I was only able to wonder vaguely what was up. My alarm clock told me it was three o’clock. I heard what seemed like a shot and then several sounds of something shattering. A car
       horn blew. There were more shots, a little yelling. I climbed into a few clothes_
       shoes without socks, pants without underwear—and ran down my stairs to the rooming house stoop. At the bottom of the block 1 could see an ooze of smoke and three people in silhouette. Full of hesitation, I started to walk. As 1 approached, they eyed me with an uncertain hostility. One had a stick of wood in his hand. Grass Gott. You are not a Jew. I laughed. They gave me a close look. Studentin. Jew. You are a Jew. Amerikaner. Rosenfeltstein swine. 1 am a pupil of Professor Magus Tabor’s, I said, edging away. Their attention was taken by what sounded like a small explosion. 1 ran in the other direction.
          I don’t know how long 1 wandered about. The streets were empty except for occasional gangs. The windows of the Jewish shops were being smashed. Once in a while I would see a terse convoy of trucks. Of these, I tried to stay clear. Finally the smell of smoke grew strong and I came hurriedly round a corner to find a synagogue on fire, smoke boiling up into a caliginous sky. Apparently it had been burning for some time. Small tight groups of men stood nearby, watching, talking excitedly. On the whole, though, there didn’t seem to be much going on. I was reluctant to join any group or ask any questions. My German would always sound as if it had been taught to me by immigrants at least a generation away from native—as, indeed, it had been. And taught to me by women too. So mine was a tongue, in these circumstances, it would be wise to hold.
          My peeper’s screen was silent as a snapshot. Was the Turk’s voice thick with passion or broad with his peasantry when he said “tit” or “corset” or “Come to me, baby”? Did it bespeak another clime or country? And did she reply in the high skittery voice of the harlot or in a slow farmish alto? Such things 1 would never have a chance to know. History does not contain much conversation.
          1 had given up seeking thrills and was on my way back to barracks, as we called the rooming house, when 1 ran into some friends of mine from the university: Krauske, Hintze, Link. They said the Jews were being burned out, carted away, or killed. They said phone lines had been cut, and that block after block was dark. The SA, they said, were petrolizing the synagogues. Police were beginning to block off the vandalized areas, and firemen were trying to contain the fires. Such was their report. I saw none of these things myself. We all thought we’d go home, but instead we drifted in a group toward a source of noise. Shatters were racketing down a short street of shops. In a gutter a pitiful pile of battered furniture was smoldering. One store—which sold furs, I
           think—had been broken into, and a few furtive figures were carrying off bundles. We shouted at them in a friendly way. A dim figure dimly waved.
             Why was a swastika painted on that wall? Particularly then, when fascism was no longer in fashion? Whim? Like Grynszpan, was the boy consumed by a sudden passion? And had he a pot of paint at hand, and a brush too, the brush with an excellent touch, the paint with perfect pitch? Did he go to a hardware store to purchase them, as Grynszpan went to a gun shop? I have been writing about Nahzees for years, yet I should have to think carefully how to get their symbol correctly crooked, and not draw it backward, as you so often see it executed elsewhere. The running wheel. The Isle of Man emblem. Fylfot. Gam-madion. Sun. And so forth. Has ever a company contrived a better logo? Perhaps Mercedes-Benz.
             The SS were using grenades, my friends said. They were staining glass with Jewish blood and poisoning the air with Jewish fear. The names of the shopkeepers glowed against the black panes, even at night, in the gang-lit streets. Several guys flipped pebbles at the windows where they rang rather pleasantly.
           I was impressed by an occasional loud sound of pounding which seemed to come from nowhere near. Then someone threw a piece of board which went thack. Finally a hunk of iron, with a loud crash, broke a dry goods window and a large shard of plate glass fell forward onto the sidewalk, shattering with a satisfying shiver, filling the ear with elation like a firework when it whites the sky. Hey hey hey, we all said.
             1 hung on to a paving stone I could scarcely get my hand around. Now, nearby, the sky itself began to bleed. Smoke seemed the silent symbol for a scream. Hey hey hey, we all said, trotting along in the gutter, my chums firing away at the windows, watching them go to bits with a glorious clatter. The SS wouldn’t have all the fun, we said. A couple of the fellows rescued watches from broken cases. Others will just come along and take them, they said. Hey, look at the Black Marias. Better be careful. Keep clear, we said, they’re in a bad mood wide as weather. So we went down a different street, scarcely cracked yet, retrieving our stones sometimes lest we run out of ammunition. The paving block was getting awfully heavy though 1 shifted it from hand to hand.
             I would get tired of standing in my darkened kitchen, waiting for the mute wall opposite to go to Condition Glow and give me something—a scene, a situation, a bit of excitement, an illicit sensation. Back to the books. I read them in a moldy threadbare chair, formerly stuffed, but now lumpy with its history of pillage and deprivation. The lampshade was a faded dingy tattered pink and colored the light like wet crayon. Typewriter-typed characters—for these were mostly testimonies, as I’ve said—swam in it like tiny tadpoles, multiple but meaningless. I would soon rise and go back to my window, preferring its blank
     to the meaningless sad babble of the past, alone in the dark, as silent as one of the dishes.
       ©MMODDM ***                    the wide glass said. Behind the
     name, the store was as black as a Jew’s suit. I got rid of my burden, heaving it overhand the way a goalie returns a soccer ball upheld, and it did seem to hang quite a long time and seem to fall from a great height, although I could never have seen its flight only heard it hit and the glass implode, fragments like sleet flying everywhere, sheets shattering inside the shop, fewer on the street. There was more pitter than patter, I think. Now, if 1 wished, I could steal perhaps a cabbage or a big beet.
         “Why have you come here, Hershey? You know we agreed you would never come here. And 1 wasn’t to visit your uncle’s flat either.”
         “Chert..."
         "Don’t speak that degenerate tongue to me.”
         “Liebchen, then. You sound as if we still were."
         “What?”
         “Darlings.”
         “Well, you asshole, we’re not. Hershey. Look. We've been through this. I thought you understood our rules and would obey them. I cannot risk an extended affair with a Polish Jew, not a man with my background, not a man in my present position. For god’s sake, surely you can see that.”
         “You’ve been in positions you preferred to this one, certainly.”
         "Oh, shit, Hershey, don’t be gross.”
         “1 loved you, Ernie, and then you lied to me.”
         “I have been brought up not to lie.”
         "Your whole life’s a lie, like my life’s a lie, chert. It is worthless. You serve masters you despise, masters who would put your faithful lover in prison, bugger him with a bullet.”
         “My father . . .”
         “For my father . . . You and your brother-snuggering Boche have driven my father from his home ... I ve found a use for you—”
                                          pop
         “Hershey . . . !”
         “You'll be a martyr to my cause—”
                                          pop
         “Pleezz . . . !”
         “And you won’t be cocksucking your new friend, Cecil, anymore, either— Cecil the Psycho-Seaman.”
                                             pop
             "My Gowld!”
             “About time you called on Him, you Protestant Prick!”
                                         pop
                                         pop
              Crafty Herschel Grynszpan, seeing a way out of all his troubles, agrees to act for the Germans against vom Rath, at once avenging his parents, getting even with the lover who jilted him, and hiding his homosexuality until its revelation might have beneficial consequences.
              Something like that.
              I admit I retrieved my “brick.” It sailed well into the store, landing upon a counter where I suppose vegetables were normally binned but which was now bare of roots, fruits, and leaves. It wasn’t easy to find, and I stumbled about a bit before 1 caught sight of one of its harsh corners, lit by a fire just begun on the block. My intention, I vaguely recall, was to keep it as a souvenir, even though 1 couldn’t then know this was Kristallnacht. And would remain Kristall-nacht for all time. Two o’clock on Kristallnacht. When the Jewish watches stopped.
              As my mentor, Magus Tabor, said, half of history is revenge, the other half is its provocation.
              It was a youthful prank, our smashing the windows of the Jews. We mimicked, for a moment, the manner of the mob, which would have got to them anyway, sooner or later, and probably would have sharded them with far greater efficiency than we could muster, since we quite lacked the Gestapo’s practice, the SA’s passion, the SS’s purpose, the storm troopers’ boots.
              Near the end of the street was a small shop whose facade stirred in me obscurely favorable memories, so I gave it my stone as if stones were a standard gift on these occasions, and a wave of chocolate drifted out from the confectioner’s confining cases, cases a bunch of us immediately violated. Although I was fearful of being scratched, I stuffed a few sweets in my pocket. My friends filled their pockets too. You know, one said to me, I come here sometimes, and I don’t think this place is kosher. It wasn't wearing a kikey name. Hey hey hey, we all said, and got the hell out of there.
              Vom Rath was probably frostier, more self-contained and formal, than I have portrayed him. He probably put on his Junker manners, and looked down a sharpened nose at Grynszpan, who was a lowlife, after all, someone whose pants vom Rath could simply order dropped, and whose Jewishness was his principal attraction. He might have preferred a roughneck like my Turk, but my
      Turk would be too old for him, and did not appear sufficiently subservient. Not if the way he kicked his errant trousers toward the chair was any indication.
         Grynszpan was a kid of course, only seventeen, spoiled and lazy, displaced, illegal, looking for some sort of definition for his shiftless life, a candidate for suicide, a nebbish—yes—a real nobody with scarcely a friend, dependent upon handouts, and facing a future as unpromising as a pigeon’s, the future of anyone who lives on crumbs.
         Back in my room at the barracks, 1 stood by its one window as quiet as a dish and looked out on the avenue, which was quiet too. Soon it would be another day. Dawn was breaking into the black sky. In the dimmest of distances, 1 could make out an unkempt line of shapes. I ate a few chocolates. They would be my breakfast. Perhaps the sugar would help my head, which was beginning to ache. It was the same sort of intense staring—where you hear your heart like a muffled clock—that I was engaged in in my kitchenette during that autumn 1 studied the Grynszpan case (being history’s Holmes and called Sherlock by my friends), only to endanger my reputation as a sleuth by determining that in this case there were at least three correct conclusions to be drawn.
         To the Jews it didn’t matter how many. Might be drawn. Or colored in. Correct conclusions.
         I remember thinking, whether shot or beaten, most deaths were disturbingly alike. They are all alike in the long run, Mad Meg said. The murder 1 preferred was that of the Scripture Reader who ran into a burning synagogue to rescue its holy objects. As he came out, his coat aflame, he was set upon by a crowd of kids who kicked him to death with every foot handy (in the process smothering the fire in his smoking coat). Then they played alley catch with the sacred scrolls.
         I am slow to wit. Only now do I understand why I waited in that kitchen, dark and empty, each of us, me and the nette, moment after moment. Waited without otherwise passing the time by playing a tune in my head or displaying an image I treasured or raising a thought I could worry. I was waiting for my life— waiting for it. When the window went blank again—so immediately too, the life span of a spark—1 was erased like a former time. Hence I stood as a cup sits. To be filled. Openmouthed. Roundly lipped. Of a small space, a pure pool.
         During the second showing there was not a single chair in sight. That’s right. My god. And the bolsters—where were they? The rug was fulvous—not a color I remember from the first time. Was the wall papered or painted? The bed was made of metal. Was it? Shit. That the coverless pillow was gone should call for no comment. Could I feel sure it was the same, generally featureless, space 1 was spying my spying in? with Greenspan in one scene, Turk in t’other? boy in one bed, woman in stead? one of me watching one room, another another?
              I’m slow to wit. Only now do I comprehend. What? It. I watched, read. I waited for a reassuring sight: of a life lonelier than my own, more sordid, tasteless, tepid, thin. Fearful of enjoying joy. Accepting any explanation that was denigration, accepting only the v in virtue, and in that brutal way getting the v in vice right. I remember my relief when my paving block broke the pane of that second shop, the shop of a goy. You see, I said to my cold soul. For my part, it wasn’t just Jews.
             THE FIRST WINTER Thefim winter of our OF MY MARRIED LIFE ife»elived
                                                           a slum near the edge of
           the Wabash. The university had thrown up half a dozen prefabricated duplexes during the war and rented them out to the faculty whom it also impoverished in other ways. The war was over. 1 had persuaded Martha to marry me. I carried certain glorious credentials, and we were both ready to make a start in life, as the saying was then. It proved a bitter winter in every respect. We lived side by side with a fellow from biology: his sink butted our sink; his john rubbed the rear of ours; the shower stalls were linked; and we shared laundry and storage sheds like a roller towel in a public lavatory. Our garbage went in a common can and we parked our cars nose to tail in the street like sniffing dogs. Often the mailman got our letters mixed.
             In front, the property was divided in fair-minded halves the way Solomon, in his wisdom, would surely have apportioned it (around their gum tree they planted crocus bulbs, while around our Chinese elm we put in daffs); but the backyard was enclosed by a weak wire fence which any gumptious turf would have shoved aside in a single season. There our lawn lay in pale passivity while weeds pushed through its flimsy sod like the spikes of a florist's frog. We were conscientious renters, though, and by unspoken agreement, took carefully measured turns to mow the dandelions and plantain down.
             The walls were thin, and soon we were sharing our quarrels too. The sounds of lovemaking passed between us like cups of borrowed sugar, and cooking odors were everywhere like the same paint. When the cold water tap on our tub was first turned, a shudder went through the pipe to which it was attached, it seemed to me, all the way to the reservoir. A single furnace fired us, but somehow all our ducts were tangled, so that the moans and groans of the house would wander like lost souls, carried through them on the warm rising air, to emerge with a bright irrelevant clarity (“. . . on the sofa . . .” “Carrie called . . .”
              . later. . . -n’t the time . . .”) in any odd place at all and abruptly as a
       belch—occasionally even returning to the room where they’d been made______
       echoes as battered as our cooking pans.
         When we met on the walk outside, often hugging groceries or lugging books—just because we heard our toilets flush—we scarcely spoke, our heads hidden behind redly stenciled paper sacks; and in the laundry room, encounters were so brief and polite the gas man knew us better. Martha’s ardor oddly came and went, and although I knew it was connected with the goings-on next door, it did not simply wax and wane with them; the correlation was more complicated, duplicitous, remote.
         We were soon ashamed of our own sounds, as if every sign of life we made were a form of breaking wind. We were ashamed because we believed we heard the pop and creak of their floors, their stairs and settling springs, when normally we never noticed our own; because the scream of their kettle called us to our quiet kitchen; because we struggled to restore some sense to the voices which burbled and rumbled behind our common walls as one strains a pulpy juice for jelly; and we had to assume that they were curious too, had exchanged lewd grins, held fingers alongside their noses like Santa Claus in that stupid poem, and had at least once listened through a wineglass to passages of passion of one kind or other. They would have been mostly about money, then, for at that time we hadn’t any, nor could we hear any harmony in the loose rattle of our change; so we fought like children about whether we should spend or save.
         Martha kept faith in a challenging future. I lapsed like an unpaid policy. Hence Martha conserved while I consumed. She sold. I bought. She bawled me out. She wanted me to quit smoking. It was a selfish habit, she said. She claimed we couldn’t afford to buy books or pay dues in my damn clubs or fees for regular checkups. Nothing’s going to go wrong with a nice soft body like yours, she said, palping me like a roasting turkey. The university’s library was large. There were lots of free lectures, and all the good movies would come round again like the famous comets. But who wants to watch a film as ancient as the family album? who cares about last year’s lovers, or all those stabbings stale as buns, or auto chases on worn-out tires, I said, exasperation showing in my prose.
         But we cut back. We inspected the dates on our pennies. I felt like a shabby freeloader, attending receptions just to snuffle up the cake and cookies, pocket mints. We kept magazines until they were old enough to be reread; converted boxes, cans, and jars by means of decoupage, a little sanding and shellac, into jaundiced baskets, pencil crocks, and letter bins—Christmas presents for the folks which only cost us our pride. I licked her slender vaginal lips like a Roman emperor. The simple pleasures are the best, she said. I cadged return-ables from our neighbor’s trash; she returned the empties, saved trading
           stamps, suggested an extensive use of departmental stationery, the department phone for distant friends. Off and on I’d hunger for a steak, a melon, or a mound of shrimp. I think the wine we drank was trampled in Vermont.
             Indiana’s cold came down the river like a draft, and the deep gray sky grew closer every day. Chimney smoke seemed simply an extension of it, as did one’s steaming breath. 1 had suffered many a Midwest winter, but I had never been married to the snow. During an embrace, I would discover my arm clamped about my wife’s waist like a frozen limb.
             At first the snow helped. It kept us in. We played Parcheesi to calm our nerves. Martha would cook chicken livers again, and then, because they were so cheap—dear god—immediately again. She recommended peanut butter and claimed beans were a good buy. They blow balloons up your ass. I’d shout, with an embarrassed unoriginality, and then we would both look warily up and down, ducking my outcry as if I’d just hurled a tennis ball against the wall. In this toilet-tissue house, I’d hiss poisonously in her ear, we can't afford to fart. Then even when there was boot-deep snow, a cold scarf of wind, I’d leave the place to pout, closing the front door cautiously, violence in my silent face.
             They’d designed our building like a pair of paper mittens, but the left mitten had been limp when we moved in, otherwise we might have been warned; and when its new tenants arrived, we found nothing amiss in the movers’ tread or the gruff reality of their voices. The clear scrape of cardboard cartons did not trouble us, or the thump of heavy chests. Besides, it was warm, and the windows were open. We simply had new neighbors. There was a hand now stuffed in the other glove. The noise was natural. Things would settle down. We hoped they would prove to be sympathetic types, maybe even friends. Then a headboard bumped rhythmically against what we’d thought was our most private wall. Their vacuum cleaner approached and receded like a train. Waters were released which gushed and roared and even whistled. Didn’t I hear a male voice singing "Lazy Mary’’ one morning? Whose life could ever be the same?
             After that we tiptoed, grew footpads, became stealthy. When we heard their closet hangers jangle like cattle on a hill far away, we shut our doors so silently the latches snicked like a rifle. 1 had heard his heavy smoker’s hack (hollow, deep, and wet as a well), so we took multivitamins to ward off coughs, then syrups to stifle them when colds caught us anyway, and increasingly felt like thieves and assassins.
             Our ears were soon as sensitive as a skinless arm, and we spoke in whispers, registered the furtive drip of remote taps. It was like living in front of a mike as you might pose and smirk in front of a mirror. We heard ourselves as others might hear us; we read every sound the way we read the daily paper; and we came to feel as though we were being chased, caught, charged, and humiliat-
      ingly arraigned for crimes against the public silence—for making obscene phone sounds at the symphony or crying out loud at the circus.
        In the flush of our shame, we wanted no one to know us, so we held hats in front of our voices, coats over our sinks and drains. We treated even the crudest iron cooking pot as if it were Limoges, slowing our motions as movies had shown us we should to defuse explosives. I ceased singing in the shower. We kissed only in distant corners, and as quietly as fish. We gave up our high-spirited games. Martha no longer cried out when she came, and I grew uncertain of her love. Small incidents were absurdly enlarged the way the shine of a mosquito is magnified by an enclosing darkness: a fallen spoon sounded like a broken jar, a shattered glass was a spilled tray, a dropped book a bomb. I exaggerate now, but it’s true that as our neighbors sensed our presence the way we had theirs, they sent their sounds to Coventry too, and the house was shortly filled—palpably stuffed—with silence like a stomach’s ache.
        I began to suffer from insomnia. The dark boneless hollow of our bedroom seemed the menacing shape of my future, and I stared into it as if the energy of my eyes would act as a light. Maybe, less than a forearm away, another husband was doing the same—one whole half of his hopes discovered to be empty as a soldier's sleeve. It was not the kind of commencement 1 had counted on. 1 thought of my career (it was the commonest cliche) as one great climb— stretches of superhuman effort spelled by brief stops for rest and acclimation. People and towns would assume their true size, dwindling like the past behind me, becoming merely part of the grand patterns of history. 1 knew 1 would have to strain every nerve (as it was uncomfortably put) to realize my ambitions. A simple inspection of the past was child’s play, but the composition of history was not a young mans work; it was not an arena for the display of an ill-informed or immature mind; no inept cape, however flamboyant, could turn aside the charges of time; it was not everybody’s satisfying hobby or soothing Sunday scribble; for how many great ones were there in a century? when poets were as plentiful as pilchards and paintings bloomed like fields of fall weeds. I would have to climb beyond bias, become Olympian, part the clouds; and already 1 had resolved to work with material so racial and rednecked and cruel and costly (the extirpation of the Jews exceeded any subject), what tools or gloves or masks or prophylactic washing-up would protect me from contamination? It was not like the commitment of the poet, whose projects were likely to last as long as his latest erection—whether for elegy, ode, or little lyric—or till the clit was rubbed like an angry correction.
        1 suddenly realized, considering this, that perhaps 1 spent so readily because 1 felt more secure in my future, while Martha conserved because she felt she hadn’t any.
               Home life (ho hum life, my colleague Culp insisted) ... the home . . . The orphanage in my hometown was called the Home. The home was supposed to be a help: a place of rest and solace you returned to at night and went forth from refreshed like a watered plant. Despite the fact that my childhood home had been nothing like that, and although I had the satisfying cynicism of a young man who has read about more evil than he’s seen, and even though 1 already had the deepest misgivings about every form of human relation: nevertheless, I hadn’t married to be miserable, to be picked apart by fury and malice, crushed by common chores; I fully expected to inhabit such a place of peace and pleasure: a castle, a home, an Eden.
               . . . within which the body of one’s wife warmed and restored, as it had the elders of Israel from the beginning. The magic of her scented flesh made you the man you needed to be “out there where the war was (didn’t the magazines and movies say so? the daily papers and the pulpit?); but already it was my work which stood steady when the world rocked. I had scarcely picked up my pen when it began to replace my penis in everyone’s affections. It wasn’t fair. Culp, a man I at first found amusing, and brash as a bush on a hill of dung, claimed he went to work solely to summon the strength, simply to find the courage (he said), only to gain the time (he would insist) to close the clasp on his briefcase and go home. O to grow the guts to go. It’s like leaving a full glass, he would say, staring like a lover at his desk. Although (his I’s rolled as if he were bowling) . . . although I am naturally capable of living without children or chatter or contretemps for long periods, I deliberately dull the memory, he always said; I put my mind’s eye out; I promise myself there’ll be peace, there’ll be plenty, at 1122 Liane Lane, my little mortgaged lean-to, my cottage at Lake Concrete; and by god such sanctimonious self-deceptions work until I see it sitting like a sick chicken in a mud-yard, till I hear my driveway gravel crunch like dry cereal under my wheels, till 1 put my key in that stiff marital lock again.
               I understood Culp’s attitude. The office hound was a common enough creature. But like cancer, 1 wasn’t going to contract it. Like auto accidents, it was something which broke the legs of other people. At home (he sighs like a whistle) I sit in my easy and read the Wanteds. It’s my pornography. I dream of all the jobs I might be doing which would take me off, out, up, and away; I’d be Peter Pan if they paid me peanuts; and when hunger becomes overwhelming, I assuage it by chewing on checkbooks till the bills taste paid.
               It wasn’t fair. Martha slept like a plant, her senses all drawn in, at rest within her snoozing like a rug; while I marched into my sleeplessness as if it were a desert I was crossing (at the head of a column of sweaty and mutinous men); but the pain I felt was neither dry nor hot, but rather like a winter which will not release its grip—long gray rains raining coldly into May.
        Our neighbors became our single subject. Their sounds composed a text we grew rabbinical about. From the slow sizzle of fat in a frying pan we inferred not the bacon but the pig, and their various treads upon the stairs drew a map of their marital emotions like those one gets from friends to find their cottage at the lake. (Deception. Lost ways. I knew that.) As for our own life: we cared only for concealment, nor could I burble at Marty’s breasts as in the old days, or let an erection chase her through the house like a toy spear; and since our quietness kept our movements hidden, we would inadvertently sneak up on one another (sometimes Marty would shriek—it was hide-and-seek—when I came upon her suddenly). There was a time when our startles seemed funny. Then we would glare at the offending wall and grin at each other; but eventually the tide of attention turned, and we could only smirk at some empty corner of the ceiling and sneer at ourselves instead.
        We were two pairs of turtledoves—linked by leases not by flesh, thank god!— but they were our Siamese twin, nevertheless, the mocking shadow of our sensuality; and we had scarcely reached our car in the morning when the examination of their habits began: we were outraged, amused; we giggled like girls; we had nasty arguments on points of interpretation; we considered confusing them with a barrage of false sounds, by launching attacks of heavy breathing; I suggested some interesting scenarios, but Martha would not fall in with them. We tended to take sides, Martha preferring the trail the male left, naturally—spoor whose righteous quality escaped me altogether. My trust twisted to suspicion. Perhaps she was already their accomplice; perhaps she heard their passion more eagerly than she felt mine. Was the other side of the wall growing greener grass? I asked her, exasperation once more showing in my prose. Without receiving a squeak for an answer, I dropped Marty off at the local historical museum where she’d got a job minding tomahawks, propping stuffed squirrels in attitudes of life on branch-resembling sticks, and dusting flints.
        The only plus was the pleasure we both took in discussing our odd and often silly circumstances with the many acquaintances we were making at the university then; and we naturally lingered over the more scandalous details, describing the pressures of so public a private life on souls as newly glued by lust and law as we were. A little untoward heat (we said) might melt us down from one another like a custard from its coating; a sudden jar might shatter our fragile ties; an unexpected stress might stretch our sympathies to a point beyond elastic (so we went on, piling comparisons up like fruit in a market window); we might weaken like moistened cardboard and our bottom pop. So our misery became entertainment like stories of the war, and from what had been a heap of jagged shards we shaped a graceful vase—something slightly salacious in the lush red-figured style. We guessed, and guessed again, and guessed
          some more, enlarging on our information like any secret service until facts were so larded with conjecture it became impossible to distinguish the marbling from the meat.
             We were thought to be amusing—fresh, unique—(I do believe that)—and we certainly didn’t hesitate to extricate whatever criticism of my powerful employer—our poor absent landlord-—was implicit in our histories, not to conceal it out of caution, but to hold it up for view and comment like a hair found floating in the soup, comparing the ironies of our situation to the slice of lemon which lies beside the cup of life; and these gibes provided an additional pleasure for our listeners, as it turned out, since the university was thought to be composed of three strata at that time—deans, dissidents, and dunces—with no one we met admitting to either ambition or stupidity; so we went wild; we put grotesques in every role as real as any real ones, bringing them forth as Dickens might have done—creatures pushed into shape through pastry tubes—each with traits as neatly defined, distinct, and freshly baked as cakes on a plate of cakes.
             My student days kept step as I marched away into marriage, the military, and my profession. College had been a long and boring banquet whose food I’d somehow digested yet couldn’t excrete. There were those selfsame hierarchies and ordered rows around me still, like the hedges of a labyrinth; a torrent of judgments, of ranks and scores, fell without fertility; the division of days into periods of improvement—hours of regulated relaxation, a few moments of pleasure paid for by pitiless stretches of melancholy which ceased only in beery sleep—went on incessantly like the little clicks of a pedometer; time and social difference had achieved no change (from student to soldier to assistant professor); for what was the distance from Martha to masturbation when you put an interior tape to it? . . . yes, there was, in particular, life at close quarters.
             The memory of those makeshift apartments in Urbana followed me now like a homeless animal. 1 could see again the rooms which greed had eaten out of attics like moths, coal cellars covered in oilcloth like the inside of a cheap coffin, the paneled garages smelling of grease and gasoline; I reoccupied those stools under dormers which made you double up to shit, closets where the clothes rod was a water pipe; and I remembered a friend who had an entry straddled by a shower stall, another whose bed backed against a boiler; but I particularly could not drive away the image of those tiny pre-used Polish toilets which were as close to the living room as a lamp to its chair, so that we couldn’t help hearing the gush of the girls, always good for a giggle, and had to aim our stream against the quiet porcelain to be discreet ourselves, or pinch it painfully thin.
             I saw that Martha suffered far more than I from our unaccustomed closeness. Women weren’t used to long lines of nakedness as soldiers are, or the
       sycamores in winter. Gaunt, bleached, bony, the trees seemed a cold growth of the snow itself, a solidification of melting air the way icicles were a congealed product of the sun.
         I also recalled squatting in a cold hole once on perimeter patrol, listening with the same intensity for the enemy (and since I didn’t know what the enemy would sound like, I made it up out of movies: the crunch of a boot in the snow, a frightened wheeze, the unmistakable clink of metal, rifle snick), my ears like those dishes they tune to the stars. The world was cemetery still, and dark as the dead beneath the stones.
         Now silence was a great white field which Martha and I fled over like lines of running ink.
         The trouble was, when I thought about it, that we were always the butts on the body of our anecdotes—the goats, the fall guys—the grotesques who were so amusing. And then it occurred to me to wonder whether they weren’t telling tales, too, over there in biology, among faculty members we never met; and the thought was terribly sobering somehow, as if our plight were a program like Fibber McGee's that no one would want to miss; except there were two versions, two lines of listening, the right line and the left, like lobes of the brain or parties in politics; and which one was funnier, I had to speculate, which one’s butts were bigger, in which did the fall guys prat more convincingly, the goats smell raunchier?
         And Martha, who was always so saving, wanted to go out all the time to bars and movies, to drop in on friends where, after the customary inquiries about health and children, the rigamarole would begin again. Since we had no privacy in private, we sought it out in public. The strategy didn’t succeed for either of us. Though alone in a movie with a gray screen dancing, she would throw my hand away, when it crept into hers, like a used-up Kleenex, because we were married now and had, she said, no need to grope or fondle. In bars we would back ourselves in booths and speak, when we did, like conspirators. People will think we’re married, all right, she said; married—but to other people. Isn’t it getting to be that way (this was the general form of my reply); at home, don’t you listen more to that other guy?
         The cash we were conserving slipped away like our affections, literally through our fingers, as our touch became callous and mechanical. Martha grew testy about the money because she was the one who was spending it; and she grew testy about the loss of affection, because she had stopped bringing me up and never would bother again, as if her own large beauty should henceforth be enough; and though it was enough, her attitude made me resent every erection, and dislike the effect her nakedness had on me. What if all that blood became noisy, I said. What if 1 whistled through it like their kettle? What if, she said. What if?
             In the early fall I had already begun to go down to the river to see the face of winter in the water, the slow logs and dry shoals. Crickets and hoppers were still rising ahead of my feet like miniature quail, and the weeds which had bearded the banks during the long stand of summer were high and heavily in seed; but the water returned their image to a sky which was as quiet as the river. My own face, too, fell open in the middle like the habit of a book, and by looking down, I could watch myself staring up, eyes already a bit puffy, the coming winter in my face. It was a smooth look, like an oiled door.
             Here it was, our first winter, and we should have been rolled around one another like rugs. We should have been able to overcome small obstacles such as walls which were too flimsy to hold up, hide, or impede anything—which were not obstacles at all—yet here we were, our love cut judiciously in two like the front yard. This nonsense of ours was using up my life and there was nothing I could do about it. Then 1 wondered whether she wasn’t ashamed of me, ashamed to be heard with me in public, as though I whinnied. Would she lead a frank and noisy life with a brawny stud? Would she giggle and scream and writhe when they made love; compel that other couple to wish for pleasures they were inadequately equipped for and could not achieve even through installment dreaming?
             He was tall and very thin and very dark. She was petite. She skittered, but his tread was erratic as one might imagine a scarecrow’s to be—with unskillful and unfeeling feet. Mine was regular as meter (I did believe that), and Martha’s was . . . Martha’s was that of a thousand-pound thistle. She put on bras and slips and blouses and sweaters, then added blazers and heavy wraps on top of that—overclothes to cover my eyes. Do you want to disappear entirely, to be snowed under layers of skirts, smocks, and mufflers? Instead, it was I who disappeared like a magician’s assistant. I knew she waited until I left the house to remove her diaphragm, a smelly elastic device that no longer went in automatically like change in a purse or keys tossed in a drawer, and would never replace the ear as an organ. I said you’re making me into a stranger. Her nose peered between the tan slats of a Venetian blind she opened with scissored fingers. Our neighbor’s Plymouth was, or was not, parked behind us. She felt grubby, she said. I received no requests to do her back. The museum, she complained. Dusty work. Scaly scalp. She washed always behind the bathroom door with washcloths moistened with mineral oil; dusted the davenport with damp rags; did the dishes at dawn; read in a dim light. She could slither from street dress to housecoat to nightgown without allowing a fellow a peek’s worth, as one always imagined the bride of a Bedouin to be able, or a Girl Scout under a blanket—a skill I hadn’t counted on and didn’t admire. No one phoned. The brush man did not knock. She said it’s late. What you couldn’t see, perhaps you couldn’t hear. I could hear a fork strike an empty plate.
        The first snowfall that year caught the trees with their leaves still clinging to them, and the weight of the wet snow did what the wind hadn’t—pulled them free to settle on the surface of the river. There, for a few moments at least, they resembled massive, slowly moving floes. It was a vagrant similarity, but it sucked me up from Indiana the way Dorothy was inhaled out of Kansas, placing me in an airplane near the pole where I could see below me the rocking gray water and great herds of icebergs seeking their death down the roll of the globe.
        This sudden switch of vision was indeed like a light, and gave me some understanding of the actual causes of our absurd situation. We were living in an image, not in a flimsy wartime throw-up. There was no longer any reality to the clatter of pans and dishes, shoefall, outburst, sigh of a cushion; there was no world around our weary ears, only meaning; we were being stifled by significance; everything was speech; and we listened as the house talked only in order to talk ourselves, to create a saving anecdote from our oppression, a Jewish character, a Jewish joke.
        Walking along the edge of the river, I no longer saw those lovely pale leaves pass me like petals, as if some river flower were blooming oddly out of season (poetry appearing abruptly in my social prose); rather I took them to be elements of a threatening metaphor, because I had suddenly seen that the world was held together only by frost and by freezing, by contraction, that its bowels contained huge compressors and ice-cold molds; so the place where 1 stood looking over a trivial Indiana landscape—snow freshly falling upon an otherwise turgid, uninteresting stream—was actually a point on the hazardous brink of Being. Consequently there appeared before me an emblem of all that was— all that was like a frozen fog—exhaust from the engines of entropy; and I saw in the whitened leaves floating by me an honesty normally missing from Nature’s speech, because this adventitious coating threw open the heart of the Law: this scene of desolation—relieved only by the barren purity of the trees— this wedge was all there was; and then I understood that the soft lull of August water was but a blanket on a snowbank; the dust that a wave of wind would raise was merely the ash of a dry summer blizzard; the daffodils which would ring our Chinese elm were blooming spikes of ice, encased in green like a thug’s gloves; there was just one season; and when the cottonwoods released their seeds, 1 would see smoke from the soul of the cold cross the river on the wind to snag in the hawthorns and perish in their grip like every love.
        Uninterpreted, our neighbors’ noises were harmless, and soon would have been as dim in our consciousness as the steady eeeeeen of an electric clock, or the slow glow of a nightlight; as it was, the creak of a spring signified a body on the bed, a body, a bed—that meant fornication, transports of passion as long as a line of lorries, the free use of another for the pleasure of the self, the power to produce forgetfulness, ease, peace, sleep; it meant a disturbing measure
            now lay alongside our own love like a meter bar—how long? how large? how deep? how final and sufficient? how useful? wise? how cheap?—and in virtue of such steps our minds had moved the whole arc of the dial, from unpremeditated act to accidental sound, from accidental sound to signal, from signal to sense, from sense to system, from system to . . . the chaos implicit in any complete account.
              For a month we fell toward the ice at the center of hell (grandeur finally showing in my prose), and I think it was the weather which convinced us we were bored and beaten by surveillance; we were at last embarrassed by the bloated selves our stories had made of us; close quarters had become half-dollars, although, in this small pocket, we jangled together without real change. But now the wind came up the river like a steamer. The windows iced over. Would pipes freeze? I called responsible people and received assurances which didn’t assure me. We told our friends of these fresh troubles, but I felt none of their former warm interest. We had worn the rug until I couldn't read its welcome. The center was gone. Only W@ fftfO® remained beneath the shuffle of our feet. So we struggled into English sweaters and wore wool socks; we went to movies to replace our feelings, and sat in bars to keep warm and lose touch. With malice in my symbolism, 1 drank boilermakers—to lose track, I said, without a smile to greet the pun—and on place mats which displayed a map of the campus the color and shape of a spilled drink, I wrote to friends about positions in the South.
              Culp was the only exception. He retold our stories for us, harboring our grudges until they seemed the flagships of his own fleet. He became another kind of auditor, his intense interest hemming us in on what we might otherwise have thought was our free and open elbow—the out side. Perhaps it was Culp who had worn our welcome thin, for he would show up at parties, picnics, and processions to chortle and nudge, allude and remind, elaborating on our originals until they began to shrink within the convoluted enclosures he gave them the way paintings dwindle inside heavy ornate frames, or turtles hide. That predatory historian, Martha fumed, has kidnapped our life; and she was right, but not for ransom. I still believe Culp holds whole booths of convention bars enthralled with reminiscences of those difficult early years of his marriage, when he lived in a hut on the banks of the Wabash (a double-hovel, he already called it), encountering everywhere in his own air the image of another, as of course he said, like finding someone else’s fart in your own pants.
              How are you, I’d ask Martha with real worry. How are you feeling? Of course I was concerned for my own safety. I wanted to know if a storm was coming. It sometimes seemed to me 1 could see snow sliding out of the ceiling and melting on us as it melted on the river, though now the river was beginning to
      freeze, to disguise the flow of its feeling beneath a shell of ice. The sycamores were stoic, and there were deep crusted holes in the drifts where I’d walk. 1 found my tracks a comfort. Where I had been I would be again, returning to old holes, yet they were only the weather’s memory. 1 wondered whether this winter’s warfare would disappear in the spring, or would be mired down in mud like the troops in Flanders?
        We’ll look for another place, I promised. What’s in the fine print? Perhaps we can break our lease; maybe keep a big flea-barking dog. Martha’s enthusiasm was persuasively unconvincing. Perhaps she didn’t want to be alone with me again. Did she sense what was surfacing? Maybe she liked the protection. Say, 1 said, suppose I turned vicious, you’d be safe. One peep would be as good as calling the police. Martha mimed a scream, her mouth so wide it could have swallowed a fist. Oh no, even if you were murdering me, they wouldn’t murmur, she said—would we murmur? We might shout “Shut up!" as they do in the big-city movies; we might bang on pipes the way you do to call the super; we might return outcries like party invitations. Martha shrugged. Her cleavage was another cunt. Well, 1 might do any one of those things, I suppose, she said; I think they're in my nature; but not you—oh no, not you, ever. It would be impolite and forward and beneath your blessed dignity. Then why am I staring at the floor like a schoolboy? The gods look down, don't forget, she said. Our floors were made of that hard asphalt tile which broke your feet (1 had dubbed the color “abattoir brown” when we’d first moved in), and that’s what I saw when I hung my head: the frozen bleeding feet of every piece of furniture which had stood there through the war, leaving their pitiful dents, as if the scars were records of wounds the weights made; and of course that was it, the world was tipping toward the north, relations were in deep reverse, blooms invading their buds, snow rising like steam from the earth, as in this doubled house, where stoves seemed warmed by their pots and compliments were a curse; for now when I entered my pale, silent, snowed-over wife, given legally to me by family, God, and social custom, it was through a cunt which lit up like an exit, and I was gone before I arrived.
        The gods, 1 said. Marty? the gods? You speak of the gods to someone who was never a choirboy. I’m the sort of lonely little gid who looks into his shoes for a sight of the stars.
        I had wanted to be put in charge of her body, not exactly as though she were a platoon, but as though my soul would wear her flesh for a change, and 1 would look out for her elbows as though they were my own, eat well and not take cold; but she wouldn’t play. I remembered kids like that when I was a kid. They wouldn't be the baby or the pupil or the robber or the renegade; they wouldn't lie still like the sick or wounded; they would never fetch, seek out, or
            serve. They were too afraid. I’m not a train, Whiffle, and I don’t need a conductor. You mean you’re not a plane, and you don’t need a pilot. I’m not a boat and don’t need a skipper. I’m not a field that needs a tractor. I hate those images. I’m a daughter; that means I have a father.
              She could have had my body in exchange, but who wants to be the boss of a barnyard, the cock for such a nervous vane? Speaking of images, Marty, how’s the one you are living in presently, the one that’s made you the thunder sheet in. the sound-room, a roof in a heavy rain? But it was no use. She no longer cared for what 1 cared for, henceforth she’d let her body burgeon like a lima bean in a Dixie cup, though there were no kids, yet, to instruct or entertain. If she had deeded it to me; if she . . . well, both of us would be as trim now as the moldings of a painted window.
              Surely we haven’t gone so fast in these few weeks we’ve passed middle age in our marriage? Is it the sound barrier we’ve broken; and are our neighbors’ noises the boom, now, we re supposed to hear? It makes no sense. And costs but one, she always answered, even when we were courting, because the statement was a tic of mine, like that obnoxious nasal sniff I had, she said. As a matter of fact, Marty darling, we’ve grown as sluggish as a pair of snakes, and if any such barrier burst, it would have to happen from the slow side of swift, like your hymen, remember? I said, letting my prose grow unshavenly toward scratch. In this house sound certainly departs for all points like the humans of Hiroshima, she said, serene and uninsulted. Sometimes I think that’s all they are over there—echoes of us—that whole half of the house is an echo, a later ring of our present life, and it’s me, then, I hear, going up their stairs.
              On her feet? that scatter of pins?
              Save your jokes for the next show, Whiff. She smiled with a meanness I hadn’t seen. And she had begun to braid her hair again, a bad sign, and write long letters to her mother—one a day, like pills. Oh no, Koh, not on her pins, on his needles, she said. Martha stared at our barely wrappered wall for a moment so pointedly I thought there might be a gap through which she saw a table or a teapot more substantial than the shadows of our own. What are his shoes, anyway, but the sound of my steps? You’ll find my feet fastened beneath those almost negligible legs and skinny trunk next time you meet.
              No such luck, Marty. Clutching groceries or garbage like a pair of paper bellies, what else do we embrace? In any case, we never see a shoe.
              You’ve heard that small black head of his, haven’t you? like a photographer’s box, go click? She laughed but I never understood the cause. The pleasure it implied seemed out of place. He’s a thorough look-see sort of man—complete-including that long lank hair which shuts out the light; and there’s his dark transparent face as well, like exposed film you can safely see the sun through at the noon of an eclipse.
          Martha did nothing to erase the extravagance of her description. A luksi sort of man, I thought. Of the monkeys, that’s not the one I would have picked; but 1 must admit to receiving a chill from this news—a chill, a chill—though in a perverse way it restored my weakened self to life like a dead drink that’s suddenly got a plop of fresh ice.
          The silences which came between us now were as regular as spaces on a page of type, and far more impervious to any message than our walls.
          You called yourself a gid. That must be good. So what’s a gid? She hated to ask. She knew how I loved an answer.
          A gid is a small god, Marty, the human kind, with more features than powers—the difference, you might say, between poetry and prose. With my fingers 1 made a meager measure. Mayor Daley is a gid. And Franco. Fred Astaire. Lowell Thomas.
          Then you re not a gid. Do they come in smaller sizes like bras?
          I hated her when she was smart-assing. A gid is as small as gods get. There’s no volume for a vowel deeper down or deeper in.
          She wondered whether it came from giddyup' or ‘yid’ or simply ‘giddy,’ and then scornfully concluded it wasn’t a word, that I’d merely made it up. We argued wearily about whether a made-up word could be one, and whether making up words was a form of lying, though neither of us cared. Well, in any case, you’re not a gid, she said. I hated her when she was hard-boiling. I hated her when she crossed her arms across her chest like a prison matron in the movies. Her cleavage was another cunt. Hey, why don’t we? why don’t we invite them to dinner? Perhaps we can reach an understanding. Maybe we can work something out.
          1 don't want to know him any better than I do already, Martha said, carrying a summer Vogue into the john.
          I was resolutely bent on comedy. If we could trade one-liners maybe we could continue to live. I suggested we let our little throw rugs grow so we could comb them across our cold bald floors.
          It may be, Martha said distantly.
          1 began to wish I had the wind’s indifference to what it did. Shall I water them, then? I tried to shout. Her first flush filled both houses like the bowl. I waited for flush one to fade. There were always two. But she had begun to hide her habits from me. She kept the corners of her toast out of her coffee; she didn't twist her table napkin; she no longer whistled while doing crosswords, or used toilet paper to blow her nose. She started rubbing toothpaste on her gums with her right forefinger, and thrusting pencils between her braids. She didn’t dog-ear books; she kept caps firmly on her jars of cleansing cream; she stopped slapping around the house in scuffs. 1 was simply at a loss. She didn’t stick her lips anymore, but that might have been fashion. I waited for flush
           two, which didn’t come. She was disguising herself. Her voice would get gruff. Soon I could expect to see a stranger’s expression on her face and a mask on her muff.
             With even these petty expectations taken from me, all 1 had left was a little inner determination, gid-greed, ambition like a stunted bud; but I silently resolved that what Ike is, and Cotton Mather was, Whiffle Koh would be.
             We lit electric fires but no others. Except for them our house was a cold grate, and we were as alive as sifting ash. Peeled outside-in by Marty’s transformations—bewildered, shocked—I only professed to be surprised so she would believe 1 always knew. But knew what? Was my blond Martha taking on that little woman’s ways? The joke became our medium of exchange.
             We would drive them out like demons. I made the sign of the cross—incorrectly—and muttered Latin imprecations. Let’s bum sulfur, I said. For a week 1 tried raising my voice and being rowdy. Martha read old Cosmos and did puzzles ripped from the Saturday Review. It’s like living in a waiting room, she said. And hearing you bawl about like someone calling trains.
             That’s it, 1 said. If I took a snapshot of our life right now, what would it look like? yeah, a drawing, a cartoon. We've bound our own feelings like feet. Our cheeks have porked. My eyes are two dots. Everything we say belongs in a balloon. Listen to your own sweet voice: stars, contorted ampersands, and yellow lightning bolts. Marty, these last few weeks I’ve felt myself emptying into outline, as if beer could become its bottle. How can our misery be any more than a funny-paper figure? Hey, remember how we honeyed one another? Has so much changed we’ve gathered only ants and flies? Marty? listen—
             Lis-sen, she said. That’s all 1 do. My left ear is as long and flat as this wall I’ve pressed it to so amorously, and I’ve kept the other to the ground as well, just as hard and down and often, so the right one here is wide and tired and dirty like the floor. My nose, Koh, in case you care, gets nothing up a nostril now but doorbell buzz and blender whir.
             So we turned up the radio to stifle our whispers and smother our shouts, as torturers did in the movies, but discovered that then we couldn’t hear anything they were up to either, and that wouldn’t do.
             The entire house seemed to have shrunk. It had become a cheerless, shabby rented room, soon to be a bureau drawer. I had been about to suggest that we stop bugging one another, but a dreary cold light fell out of the kitchen to confound me, and my voice lay down in my throat.
             Marty, come on. It’s our closeness in this crazy place—our closeness has kept us apart—but the natural, decent, and sensible thing to do would be to complain to the university together—club up, unionize, make common cause. We have a common cause, you know.
        It may be, Martha said. So, what if?
        But what I had to consider was the possibility that if we raised the issue with our neighbors, suggesting a joint resolution, and carrying the signatures of both houses to the highest quarters, they would look blankly back at us and wonder what we were talking about: their rooms were warm as their hands in their pockets; their windows were clear as the bells of St. Mary’s; their privacy as assured as money in the bank; their walls were as thick as the two crucified thieves; they heard nothing from us, of us, by us, why did we ask? what was our concern? weren’t we in love with our princely accommodations? didn’t we love to roll around naked on the linoleum?
        You know, Whiff, sometimes, in a marriage, only one side hears the other cough.
        Yeah? Well. What of it? Are we married to them, then? Is that the situation?
        One side is cold, sometimes, in a marriage, she said. One eye does all the weeping.
        Yeah. Right. Sure thing. But is our nose stuck in their moldy jam pot? And who is the cold carrot around here anyhow? which side of our bed has a marble mattress?
        Shush, she said. They've just come in.
        Shit, I shouted, on the run; but no sound could give me satisfaction, nor the silence after my slam.
        The bitterness of it. I had hoped her flesh might warm my life; but my body isn’t blubber for your burning, she had crudely said. Alas, one’s dreams are always a cliche, yet I had hoped she would fill what 1 felt was an emptiness; but I’m not going to let you wear me like a padded bra so you can seem complete, she said.
        The wind was an acid eating at my face, my anger another sort of acid searing my insides. Soon they would be near enough to greet. There was a hint of starlight, as there often was during the many clear nights of this pitiless winter, the thin moon a menacing sickle, and the dark vein of the river ran through, closing ice toward a heart far out of sight, I imagined, like a lurking troll beneath a bridge. 1 couldn’t drive her from her fantasies, however I tried. She was persistent as a bee. My boots went again where my boots had been, and I was aware, without pleasure, of the repetition. What was my passion for this ample woman but just that amplitude, that generous expanse of self? and now her hair was coiled, her thighs tense, her feelings like a tissue wadded in an anxious hand.
        We went from apology to explanation to excuse like partners at a progressive dinner.
        It bothers me to be an object in other people’s obscenities, she said—the dirt in a dirty joke—a filthy thought you can’t wash clean or even get a little soap near.
               Even in my polite pornographies? I asked, with another attempt at gaiety which would burst before blowing up like a bad balloon.
               In yours, especially, now I’ve been his leading lady. Her head wagged toward the wall in a gesture of such furious rejection I became immediately jealous. It bothers me to be all crotch. It bothers me.
               And so I thoughtlessly said I wouldn’t mind being all prick, dropping my left like an amateur, exposing myself. Anyway, how can you know what either of them is thinking?
               I know what I am thinking. I know what my thoughts watch. I know how he drinks his morning milk. I have the measure of his mustache, and how far along his lip his tongue creeps. I know what he sees in his wife. I know how he pees; and when he shits, how many squares of paper are pulled off. I hear the rattle of the roll. I know what he wants.
               My anger would never leave me. I had contracted a malarial disease. Naturally I had to hear what she imagined our neighbor saw in his wife, and Martha answered, predictably: the same things you see in me—our sentences two halves of the same dull bell. A hammer, I said, is what 1 see. A pliers. God damn it, Marty, don't cheat on the truth so transparently Do you want a use? the least utility? Just what do you believe I see when I see inside you? the peep show follies?
               Hair and heat and pink toes. You see a plate of steaming meat.
               I wished right then there were a god I could invoke to damn her truly, but the thought of her skin cracking open in some supreme heat gave me only a jack-off’s relief. Of course I shouldn’t have felt as if my soul had left me, but her words—common enough, really—were like that winter wind which rushes by so fast you can’t get a bite of it for breathing.
               Not quite, Marty, I said. When I look at you I see a stew congealing in its grease.
               The bitch didn't even weep.
               The bitterness of it. I could remember her body in its beauty waiting for me with the calmness of the coverlet. I, too, had looked at her like a lens, and she had posed for me, opened as easily as eyes to my eyes; showed a boisterous bust, a frank and honest hip, a candid cunt, as one might hand round snapshots of a trip. Then it struck me. Perhaps she believed, in those handsome early days when our lust was in its clean beginnings and the politics of the penis had not yet confused and corrupted everything, that I was gazing past her smooth full cheeks and succulent lobes toward Martha the grandly scutcheoned Muhlenberg I’d married, or grazing quite beyond her meadowed chest to Marty the blond Amazonian lass, so she didn’t mind my meddling senses, my nosy fingers, my tireless tongue; whereas now she knew I was admiring nothing but her beauty right along; and though it might be, like wealth, of immense use, it remained an
      alien and external burden if you thought of adding it to the self, because—well_
      she believed she possessed her looks like one might a Pekingese or poodle, and who would want to incorporate a cold-nose, pissy-nervous, yapping one of those? yes, wasn’t that it? for hadn’t I always wondered that very thing about women, who I had learned could be sensuous and passionate beyond my poor capacities; who could calculate faster than Clever Hans—cook, sing, farm, run households, wag ass and empire with equal ease and often with the same moves, betray causes, author novels, and learn French—but in whom I had never seen, for instance, what a sculptor must, namely the fugal forms of feeling which outstrip all proof, or the snowy mountainous elevations, the clouded unsealed peaks, the cold remote passions of the purely physical sublime?
        You don’t get it, do you, Martha said. You think I’m being cranky and perverse. You think I should be locked up like a dirty line in a limerick. Koh. You dear love. You runt. You dunce. She smiled to lower the level of her malice, but there was still enough to wet my hair. I went to the bathroom a moment ago, she said. First I heard my own feet, you know? I heard the click of the light switch, the snick of the latch, the rubbered settle of the seat. It shames me to think that someone else may hear what I just heard, what I just made—the splash of my pee, that lovely shush of bubbles like soda dying in its glass— because these are my sounds, almost internal to me, Koh, the minor music of my privacy, and to hear them is to put a hand on me in a very personal place.
        I heard the same snick, I said. It signals your safety, doesn’t it? as if I might burst in behind you to piss between your legs myself.
        Oh Koh. Please. It’s not simply that my noises might be embarrassing—a rumbling stomach or some raucous break of wind—or even that to hear them one would have to be a sneak—although such factors weigh . . . they weigh . . . but neither is the painful one, the last cruel twist which wrings me out.
        Slowly seeping down like egg white on a wall: my depression was that desperate. A kitchen table grainy with crumbs, an ashtray heaped with butts like the burned-out bodies of our voided thoughts, a faded cushion and a shredded towel—companions for this exercise—then a light that rattled away off plates like a falling fork. And so I said: have you heard your legs lock, Marty? No snick there, no click, rather a sound like the settle of the seat.
        Oh—
        No O, I said. No. X. Have you seen your arms cross on your chest like a sign warning Railroad?
        Koh—
        And when my hands fall on your bottom, I said, not to spank, because we never enjoyed that relation, but like a cornflake, a tree seed, ever so lightly, as air through an open doorway, surely you’ve felt those buttock muscles tighten?
              Please, Whiff. Please be serious. Please.
              Seriousness, 1 answered, has all but overcome my prose.
              1 remember wanting to understand, to throw my sympathy like an arm around her shoulders (at one point 1 thought, Gee, she’s still my girl, as if we were pinned or going steady and I was selfishly rushing her responses); but I was also angry, disappointed, deeply affronted (I began to believe we wouldn’t last the year out), since here she was defending her bloomers before I’d fully got her skirt up, and 1 was bitter as though bereft, because the cause of her present sensitivity seemed just a case of damn bad luck like getting flashed by the cops while making out in lovers’ lane, and had nothing to do, inherently, with us as a couple. My outrage rapidly became metaphysical. I called down on all women the character of my mother like a plague, and then cursed them with her fate.
              You know that passage in Middle-march—
              1 knew no passage in Middle-march, but I can recall insisting that it was every female's favorite fiction.
              —where she says about marriage that there’s something awful in the nearness it brings?
              I was sitting in a sugar-maple chair the sticky color of its syrup. I was uncomfortably near the knobs on metal cabinets, size of my eyes. Martha was wearing a large floral print which made her look like a trellis. To my well-fed Marty, I was a bed-and-boarding party. Wisecracks, rhymes, lay discarded like the Sunday paper. At such close quarters, our war was now down to nickels and dimes.
              I’ve been watching us together, Koh, and I’ve been thinking, too, of our twins over there like animals in a neighboring cage, and I’m convinced now that we need to live in at least the illusion that a certain important portion of our life passes unobserved; that there are walks we take which leave no tracks; acts whose following sounds are not broadcast like the bark of dogs; events to which no one need or should respond; which have, in effect, no sensuous consequences.
              I wished that this were one of them, but a metal kettle and a kitchen stool threatened immediate animation—to dance a la Disney to a tune by Dukas. The spout would say something like
              I don’t want to hear all I do—every squeak in my works. I want a bit of oblivion, Koh. I want a little rest from awareness. You’ve made me so conscious of my chest, I’m counting breaths.
              I was rolling like a spool. There’s no coughless cold, kiddo; no blow without a little snot, no ding without its answering ling, no—
              How 1 hate it when you try to crack wise. You can’t break clean. You mash. Sure, sneer. Never mind. You can’t ride away on the back of a joke. That’s what
      I’d like to do myself, though: become deaf to what’s dumb. Grin. Go ahead. How I hate it when you put that smile on like a dirty sock. Whiff, I’m sick of the shimmy, jounce, and rattle of staying alive. I want a world for a while without echoes and shadows and mirrors, without multiples of my presence. I could cut off my silhouette and not cry.
         You’re a sweet one to want a smooth ride. I thought you liked life a little hump-woof-and-rumpy.
         Well, Willie, at least you offer me a model, a measure, something to go by when I wonder in what way you love me: exactly like a marksman loves his bull’s-eye. All you want to do is score.
         She spread the slats to check for their car, turning her sweatered back to my dismay. She always said (sometimes bragging, sometimes complaining) that men's eyes went to her breasts like bees, but here she was, wrapped in wool the color of wrapping paper, her butt bee-lined with blooms.
         On our own, she said softly. Left alone ... in time ... to some things we can go mercifully blind, as our ears will grow swiftly indifferent, thank god, and all our other senses . . . indifferent to ourselves and the cells we calendar our days in.
         Above the sink the lamp sang, and the small chain leaked from its harsh fluorescent light in little links like melting ice.
         Remember when my mother had her asshole out, Marty said (she knew how I hated her coarseness, but she was an aficionado of my shame); remember how she had to shit in a sack? She got used to it. She got used to it because she had to to survive. She got used to it because nobody dared to remind her. The subject was delicately dropped.
         Like those A-bombs under their umbrellas. Marty, you can’t cancel the fallout on account of rain, when it’s the bloody rain itself.
         What I want, Whiff—if it goes off—I want a chance to ignore the noise. Yeah, cover your ears like one of those monkeys to mock me, but I’m no longer lost in our love as I once was. I keep surfacing. I feel on-screen.
         You don’t like the lead in our little blue movies? the star part? It can’t be that you’re bored with the graceless grunt and huffy-puffy business?
         You’ll laugh at me alone this time, lover. I can’t keep you company. You sprawl there with your little friend crawling down your trousers waiting for me to weep so you can take it out and put it in, because quarreling makes it uncaring, hence stiff and amorous like the little toy soldier it is. Go on. Take it off somewhere on vacation. Run away to the river. Amuse the ice. The two of you can take a leak, have a good laugh with the snow and the weeds.
         I did as I was told, throwing on my coat as though I were throwing off everything else. The sky was hard and brilliant with stars like a run of the right hand
            in a piece by Liszt. The cold air rinsed my lungs and gave them definition. All those hidden inner organs took my walk and lived no differently than I did. Even our porous duplex didn’t overstep its bounds. Beneath my weight, the cold snow crushed like crisp paper in a fist.
              With Martha I loved what I’d always loved: an outline, a surface, a shape-yes—a nipple, a lip; yet I’d become an alien in her household, an unwanted presence, worse than roaches or the wind, because she thought she was more than a football, a weight, a slack wet mouth or sack of warm skin, when no one was other than their image, print, and circumcision—none of us—we were nothing but a few rips in the general stuff of things like rust on a nickel blade, and we were each running down like radium into rays.
              So I was the thin dark man next door now, not the fair round pudge she’d married. I was the swiveling radar dish, the probe, the lens, the receiver of all her transmissions. Still, it would have been useless to remind her that a dog could smell the absence of her clothes, so she’d be naked to it, though she and the dog were walls away, since she was contemptuous of my philosophizing, which she’d called mental masturbation more than once; yet if we conceived the world properly, we would realize that the birds, ants, and insects also knew us this way: as a shadow, a sound, a scent, a sudden intrusive substance, a cutting edge—never as a soul which (please god) does not exist except in a moist cold cloud like my present breath; and that, however quiet we were, however much we muffled our oars and stoppered our mouths, little could be kept from the earth and air around us, lion our lives upwind as we’d like, because the world was alive as an antelope, all ear and apprehension, anticipation and alarm.
              I was too much the whole of that wide world. Yes. I sniffed you out wherever you went like a hound. 1 would rush from another room to say, You coughed, is everything okay? but for you that was spying, not concern; so when I rubbed your rump 1 did so only to molest you; and when I offered to comb your hair you wondered what was up, and jeered when you saw what was. You wanted a love which would have been a lie—to lie beyond the nostril and the hip—an imaginary island like Atlantis or those happy beaches of the blessed it cost them nothing to enjoy beyond the payment of their death.
              The mouth was refused first, before her back was turned like the last page. What are we, Marty, but sense and inference? and when 1 feel your smooth warm skin, your breasts like playful puddles, when I nuzzle your underarms or scent the ultimate nostos of your nest, what do I infer from what I sense? surely not the brittle stick you’ve thrown me. Be large, I begged. You will be less, my love, if you give me less.
              The bitterness of it. But there was, as in everything, some recompense. It was true I enjoyed the way my feet distressed the snow; and I approved the
       sycamores, who had no pretensions and wouldn’t have hid their bones from me on any account, or condemned my pleasures. I did not applaud the river for its beauty, because along this stretch it had none. I loved it, rather, for its welcoming indifference, the way the cold was cold, and kept me together. What, of this world of memories, a young gent’s hopes, the pale ashes of desire, could I control, or oversee, or lie in wait for like the man next door I now would always be?
         It was a winter so prolonged their crocuses bloomed beneath the snow, our daffs died in the ground, and the sun dreamed.
         Out of a frozen bottle would be forced the frozen cream; and I felt my heart expand against my chest, my coat, as though squeezed, to press against the tree trunks, push against the pointed stars, spread out upon a sterile land.
         We’d remain married. I would see to that. One life would not be long enough for my revenge. The coarse baritone in which I made my vows came like an errant echo from another skull, an outcry left behind on the stage like an actor’s closing lines. My voice in my fist, I promised the wind, trampling underfoot my former prints, Iago now the new friend, blade, and ancient of my prose.
                 Family Album
         These album pages are as lightless as oblivion, and as softly absorbent. I hate pasting the pale faces of my photographs on such a surface. It’s like lowering them away. So here is the grave-space of the painfully remembered. When I was a kid I would stretch a blanket up over the headboard of my bed and pretend its darkness protected me from every other darkness: that in closets, that in drawers, in pockets, purses, forests, basements, night skies, caves. Now I’ve drawn these sheets around me as if fearful of the boogie. And here I make my movie of your body, breath by breath.
         This is no possum play. It’s true, I used to cuddle you and now I cuddle my covers, but I am not pretending this blanket is your body or that these pages turn of my accord. The light that arrives through that little pinhole in the iris, the words and images which leave, do so indifferent to anyone’s permission. I am as helpless here as you are. The dead do not die, but, as we know, dance to the rattle of their own bones. “Red Sails in the Sunset.” When the “Deep Purple” falls. Satchmo on the last trumpet.
         Darkness is made of disgraced light, and the deepest fell on the first day, even as the sound of Lu-ci-fer—the first word—faded.
             Chaos could have been a camera cloth, the space God faced, a coated paper, and Creation simply, click.
             Click. I feel the photo of my last face has been taken.
                                               □
             Ah. Yes ... I remember this one: of my mother at the farm during her final free days. Which of her carefully skinny cousins took it? Was it Art? I can’t be sure. Was it Art after all? He usually left his shadow in the shot.
             In a sense she seems quite at home, standing rather stolidly there among the weeds, rusting at the same rate as the rest of the world. Well, the color became her, rising from within like a blush. It wasn’t my father’s favorite, though. He always said she looked lovelier in yellow. I don’t remember if she did.
             Or not.
             The roof of the little outbuilding beside her ... It was always showing off its run of red metal—that, the camera’s caught—but my mother has more of a bronze tone to her torso in this picture than she normally had, although her head looks as translucent as ever, so open to the world that in a way it isn’t there.
             Not more torso than she normally had. Her toes showed through those shoes she wore. Normally. For my mother, what a word. When she was sent to join the loonies, they washed all the old makeup off her face with rubbing alcohol—a bitter joke when you think how alcohol had emptied her head like some slop jar in the first place—to find nearly nothing underneath the thick cake of cosmetic, just as 1 imagine those Kabuki faces are erased, when the actors quit the stage, to leave only ovals for eyes and the heavy hooked line of each nose in the mirror of their dressing room.
             It has its merits—this photograph of my mother—because it shows pretty well what my father had done to her head over the years. Screwed it up, as the kids say. The little dot of white that's showing at the top is an old bow. From time to time my mother would draw it out of a colorfully embossed bonbon box like an eager secret and hold the frayed length of ribbon up in front of her nose, eyeing it with one eye closed as though aiming to thread a needle, before fastening it in her hair in memory of a dance, I think it was, a dance my father denied had ever taken place, a dance at which she was much sought after and wildly admired. I had beaus once, she would say, quite unconscious of the pun. After my father had released his customary steaming sigh of exasperation, she would calmly repeat her claim. More beaus than a bonfire. More boughs than a bonfire, my father would helplessly insist. His protest was as involuntary as the yelp of a booted dog.
                                         □
        Wait. This one is out of place. This one doesn’t belong here. This one is ■ ■ It’s that picture of my Rilke translation. Wait. Maybe not. I was in Germany just before . . . let’s see . . . Wait. After my return from Germany I went at once with my parents to the farm—that’s right—my father shuffling around the property about as rapidly as a fence runs, his cane a kind of post; and I remember his figure framed by the doorway of the house where he was trying unsuccessfully to hold on to the jamb, but instead began to slip and sink—wait, was it? has to be. yup—sink ever so slowly down around his fused bones with his molten body, moving as slowly, if you wanted to clock it, as you might walk the long walk down an avenue in the park, the avenue that went to the bandstand where the local drum and bugle corps would play during late afternoons sometimes, if it was Sunday and they weren't bespoke for a funeral, your hands held behind you as you mosey like the gent in the photo, a father dreaming of a daughter perhaps, or of a son in the service; so my father sank—what year was it?—sank slowly—it was before I took the photo of his death—sank with a squeak like the squeak of a field mouse his only protest—it’s here somewhere, that shot—a zoom—well, no, maybe not—a squeak that carried, though, into the back and went up the backbone like a scratch of chalk . . . that’s right, that’s right, so it’s not out of sync, this snapshot, after all.
        Go ahead if you like, pretend it’s a puzzle picture and hunt up the melancholy. Is it in the pigeons on the pavement, leaves on the walk, figures on the avenue, or light upon the whole wet carpet of the park?
        You’re right. The park is dry. But only in the photograph.
                                         □
        God, what a grim grim wintertime time that autumn was. 1 felt not just lonely but abandoned, abandoned by myself, of course, as though I’d put myself in someone elses storage, but abandoned also by my papers and my pen, my favorite books, my language. The room I’d let, like so many in Rilke, was filled with unbreathable foreign air and dresser mirrors into which my face fell like a blemish in the silvered backing, fell and remained fallen like a blemish in the glass, clouding the glass like a hot palm, lying there like a leaf-shaped shadow, a ghost worn out as a glove. And 1 sat on a hard little white stool which wasnt even round, oval like a seat on a john, a seat inside myself, hard as enamel, and wrote about Rilke, hard as enamel, of his similar loneliness in the faraway days, hard as enamel, and tried to find some English for his autumn poem that would also speak for me and my fears, for instance of the three fig-
           ures in the photo, raa, pa, me in the van (we might imagine) calmly approaching the DoomBoom Bandstand . . . Lord, as the poem said, it was time: time: time not to write about Germany or German guilt or anything 1 had assigned myself, but about bare basins and a shuffling in the street of feet and leaves and other litter, and of empty parks, the sad late light, the yellow trees, on the plodding woman’s hat a color my mother looked good in maybe, maybe not. A clear bright banana-yellow color. Maybe. Difficult to make out. We can’t turn back for a second look because no one gets a look at the same thing twice; there’s scarcely a first; a mere glimpse is afforded, as if we saw things through a loosely rolled fist.
             Those parks put such a lot of space around a person.
                                             □
             Look at that light. Never see light like that outside a photo, unless it’s the kind of light that signals cyclone. Bleak exposure. It must have been taken just before I came home to find my folks already packed for their visit to the farm so 1 tagged along to take care, I thought, like a little attached ticket that said from whence and to where. Where I would watch with fascination my father release his spirit and settle in the doorway of my mother’s ancestral house, limbs folding in on one another, despite his arthritic joints, like a canvas chair’s; when I would hear that single squeak, the squeak of a barely pumped pump. I’ve a pic of the pump somewhere in here. God, what a grim grim wintertime time it was. I hate close-ups. That’s why I keep my eyes closed when 1 kiss. I hate repeats. That’s why I take my second helping when I take my first. The roof of the bandstand looks like the thorny crown for a nun’s corpse. Whose design was that? Hear the dirge of the leaves and other absent instruments? 1 know what that open door is for. Virgil holds out his hand. And the lines of Rilke, of which this is a photograph, using a slow exposure, grasp me, pull me toward the darkness beneath the stand.
                           Lord, it is time. The summer was too long.
                           Lay your shadow on the sundials now,
                           and through the meadows let the winds throng.
                           Ask the last traits to ripen on the vine; give them further two more summer days to bring perfection and to raise the final sweetness in the heavy wine.
                       Whoever has no house now will establish none, whoever lives alone now will live on long alone, will waken, read, and write long letters, wander up and down the barren paths the parks expose when leaves are blown.
         Well, I was wrong. That picture was misplaced. It’s not Berlin we’re looking at, or Graz, but Diisseldorf. In Diisseldorf the avenue of trees remains unpaved. It’s the French style, I think. How reassuring the French style always is. Otherwise I would have guessed it had been taken years later, halfpast in my middle age. In Zagreb. Of course. An historian should not misplace his memories. Yet what is all this good for now? Must be Leningrad.
                                           □
         Happier times. I contrived to stroll by the doorway where my father had subsided. I pretended to look down at his angry helpless eyes, eyes whose anger had dampened mine so often . . . I managed to be in no hurry, and register no dismay. This is the harvest time, I thought. This is the store of grain that will get me through. Love has its limits, but hatred is boundless. Going by pa, then, was the culmination of my life, yet his slipping behind was the only means of my advance, just as the forward motion of a standing train is made visible by the backward passage of another. At the office, too, it was the shortcomings of my colleagues that lengthened me until I resembled a prick stiff with success.
         My father seemed a loose heap of straw, now, yet each one had broken a camel’s back.
         One’s chickens, it’s said, come home to roost; bitter seed yields bitter fruit; the whirlwind is reaped when one sows the dragon’s teeth. Old saws. Cold cuts.
         It was greeting card time. This is the photo. I held him underneath his shoulders and slowly stood him up, his chest exhaling pain. My mother’s breath smelled of juniper, as if she were the shrub. The cloves she chewed did nothing to hide it, but only added the smell of cloves to the smell of gin. Not the rocker, I said, it’s bad for your back and hard to get out of. I sat him down in a straight chair with a soft slick pad covered with cutout chickens tied to its slats. The sun swatted the porch and the gleaming banana-yellow chickens ran from a rooster whose comb and wattles were obscenely red. My father stared over the rail at the weedy yard as though it were an ocean.
         When we grieve according to instructions on a printed card, and send condolences further humiliated by verse, we do not picture death as a bunch of agreeable white bones, or render loss with smears of cigarette ash, but sur-
            round our pleasantly presented sobbing with sprays of symbolic cypress or stiff funereal flowers, and perhaps a grinning angel or beckoning Christ. Likewise here, the heap my father was has been tidied up, and my mean and tiny triumph transposed into a sweeter key. As radiant energy goes, 1 agree that gratitude has a brief life. If you cast your bread upon the waters, it will simply sog up and sink; but if you piss in the pond, you will poison the fish.
               What a pleasant picture, though: the hay heaped neatly up, depiction of a job well done, with a little ruin of Roman wall leaning at the left for antique atmosphere. All those hotshot photojourns who run after blood to take its likeness, or stand sharecroppers up in rows before the weatherbeaten boards of their shacks, or capture a grief-stricken face in the net of their lens: they pretend to be getting the real thing, don’t they? not the clap but the syph; when all they photograph is opera death, rhetorical paucity, stage pain. Who clicks the shutter for the rusted gutter, the shattered windowpane or scarified loading dock, or celebrates the weedification of the parking lot? who records the trash in the alley or the garbage on the shore? who gives glass brick what it deserves—a bash—or welcomes eye sores like honored guests? who is the Arbus of the broken sash? the Cecil Beaton of the humblest door? the Ansel Adams of pigeon shit?
                                                □
              This is how the world looks. The world looks . . . trashed. This is how the soul seems every evening after the day has done its bit. Oh, it will look worse by morning. When the flesh crawls it crawls in disgust from the bones that have flung their meat on more meat like kissing lips or smacking hands; bones that have brought the boot up and the fist down, bones that have bitten off more flesh than the gorge can spew. I happen to know that the bones of the hips in fornication squeak like that old pump I’ve a photo of somewhere, green, I think, sitting in a saucer of snow, yielding the squeak my father squeaked letting go. Here, not in a happy haystack, is reality. Here are the heartsick at home.
              Oh, sometimes the very emptiness of emptiness is appealing. Is the open mouth receiving tongue or giving one? Is it swallowing or screaming? So I shall show you now the inside of myself, your narrator, your ex-postcoital lover, where actually he is most appealing, cleaned up for company, so the distractions of scattered crap will not disturb your concentration, or lead the eye into minor moralizing. Why, you might make a marriage that’s better than most out of all this space: a fully furnished flat, spread with buttery light like morning toast. No no no—this is not my inner “I” you are looking at here; this is too open an emptiness, too cathedral an outcry, and the grime goes too evenly over
         the windows. I have no windows, washed or otherwise—not here. True, you have to descend to greet me, but once down my dirties have their own delights. Then you will find all my openings are upright like doorways. I do not believe in little wiggles; 1 cannot affirm either curve or arch; but 1 believe in the straight line, the right angle. I go together like the syllogism, box within box, so I’m built simply inside, in the Greek style—post and beam.
            All right. Here I am. There’s the bunker of the baby. A rare depiction, owned by A©®)® <®>gftii®DT) now, I think, but taken by a freelance paparazzo almost by accident one spring when an errant wide-angle lens entered my side. You can see I knew what sex and war were and was ready for the worst, out of range of love or friendship, at least when this was taken. Stripped for inaction, my wife says. I should show you my Polaroid of her pussy: looks like a-fir-treed Norwegian fiord. Just because I’m fat—sort of the weight my wife is—she thinks I’m devious the way she’s devious too; but you can see from this shot how 1 recede from sight, and that I’m sly and subtle in my own fashion. I have a wile of my own, I tell her. See how my insides gleam with green slime. I am well. And frankly, I’ll never look better than I look in this one. Nertz to Karsh of Ottawa and all his buttoned bankers. Their three-piece suits. Their polished desks. Their globes. Their ties. Who’s fooled? This is Billy boy from the time he was a baby right up to beyond now. From the first, he learned to protect himself, to steel himself against the blows of Fate, to harden his heart with a little glaze of hate. He was always honest about it, because honesty is a sign of disdain. William Tell, the schoolroom squealer. I’d have turned my parents in if there’d been a block captain to report them to. Didn’t they do what they denied me? 1 even snitched on myself. That’s what being truthful comes to. When my father called me down and told me off, as he so often did—did daily like he took a shit—I had a drunken mum to run to. Weep on that cheek. So I hit upon honesty as the best revenge. I purchased a ladder to put up high principles. Now, if I don’t like mothers, flags, or apple pies, I say so. Or Jews or Japs or gypsies. I bank race hatred like blood money. Any country that’s been a colony has got to look out for me. The rug grovelers and the wafer suckers—they stay clear. All the icks and itches. They know I’m built like one of the ovens. The infant dippers. Bead tellers. Scripture sticklers. Food faddists. Health nuts. Hairy lar-rys. There are plenty of reasons for any prejudice. History is a gold mine of excuses. So I collect racial slurs instead of stamps. Anyway, philatelists should be canceled. Culp, my crackwise colleague, thinks I’d make a million selling kikescoon caps to the KKK, or pushing his line of front bumper stickers which read (LP1P Y©y(Hf>8 in polite capitals. I acquired (as it’s felt) this flaw in my character from my father who spent his life loathing Everyman, one kind at a time. I have been frequently confused with supremacists of all sorts, with the
           anti-Semite faction of this, the antiblack faction of that, but small bites from the loaf of bitterness fail to satisfy me. (Lou satisfied me and Lou is lost.) No, there are no superiorities in my system. My indifferent principle is simply that nobody can really stomach anybody else. So I’m the human-racist. I play no favorites. I leave no one out. My favorite writer isn’t even Jonathan Swift, or Louis-Ferdinand Celine: it’s Rainer Maria Rilke, the transultimate Romantic, good old Doctor Serafico, who knew what to love—he loved things. You can have Spinoza and his beloved Ideas. Ideas don’t do it. Ringadinga.
             Here’s one. Here’s a close-up of the phone in my sousmarin. All business. Look at that. Even the light falls like a shield. Inaction, she says. Inaction, my eye. I’m always at general quarters.
             People take me lightly. People think I’m a patsy. Well, here is one of my weapons of defense, waiting to be put to use. Look at that howitzer. 1 wonder if military psyches are any better hung than mine. I can trundle this kinky contrivance along a line of hypersensitivity and—zap! Boy, it’s a mean bugger. It plugs in. See that? the cord there? Let other people keep their poopy dogs. I’ve got my underneath machine.
                                           □
            Another situation altogether. I could say this was a snapshot of me in a different mood, older maybe, mellower, displaying my rural all-aboveground ancestry. This is my sylvan side, me in a meadow moment. Well, of course, it isn’t, but it could be me. This is just a gate to a field, as a matter of fact. It’s green, but green accidentally, like the pump green I said I had a pic of somewhere, that pump that’s my father’s stifled scream. Things are what they seem to be more often than not, and this is precisely what it appears to be: a dilapidated gate, a lonely one, a gate, as you can see, going nowhere. Perhaps it is a picture of a poem. The-question is: why would anyone want to take a photograph of such a subject? Family albums must be full of shots like this. I don’t mean those views of half a cow the kids took, or those close-ups of birthday party giggles, light-struck blurs, and other smears we can’t bear to give the heave-ho to because one of them, say, is the flicker of a long-gone feeling, or the shaken snap of mother’s first drink . . . where’s that location? a frat house and sorority shindig at the U of I, it’s a pink-gin fling or some such, looks like, from the shape of the glass. I mean those quite clear, steady, and solemn photographs of je ne sais quois in concert: of a tree, an empty stretch of highway, a most ordinary and wholly anonymous house, a sign someone once thought funny—one guesses—that crudely lettered placard near a highway restaurant that says Get Gas Here.
         All right. Just a gate, then. But look. The sky is the same as the one which hung over the haystacks I said were metaphors for my father.
                                              □
         This one—this night rhyme—you won’t find in the album. This one has been blacked out like a London window because of the bombers. I kept it in my billfold until it cracked at a crease and began to divide dear Loulou’s belly, a belly that looks a little muddy anyway in this early Polaroid, unposed and unprofessionally pointed, too, you can tell, and taken with a guilty conscience, since I had snapped Lou while she was asleep. In that way it resembles the shots of their girlfriends in the altogether soldiers carried in the one good war. Sex rations, we called them. Nice, huh? they’d say, showing you their sweetheart sitting numbly in the buff on the edge of an unmade bed or in an armchair, legs apart to pussy willow, or standing uneasily in a wood, stripped even of their smile. It would be hard to find more innocent images. They were as asexual as those photographs the Nazis sometimes took of mute Jews whom hunger had desexed or terror made immune. Of course, you couldn’t be sure the soldiers hadn’t pinched their playmate pictures from unconscious comrades (they were too pure to have been purchased, too hokey to have been hawked), and were unloading now a brag of lies: how they had, back home, such a willing lay in waiting, when, in fact, they knew they’d meet their dingy little deaths at their own hand.
         Thus the darkness which presently so darkly reflects us represents the bed-clothed back of my quimdom mistress, Lou, whose skin I stroked—ah, how many many times—beneath the blankets—primordial gesture—until she turned to welcome me, or until we parted as this photo has, an image I have carried with me through my interminable years of marital war: pretty nice, huh? hot stuff, 1 would say to myself, easing it out of its fold—primordial gesture—until she and the picture parted, leaving me with a wife beneath the covers who is fully flanneled and all back.
                                        □
         Let’s take a look now at that photo of my father’s death—good time for it, right after the light has taken a little nap and is presumably fresh and full of . . . what did I say my underworld weapon did when it went to work? ... oh yes . . . it went zap!
         lap! I apologize for this—far too literal a likeness. Nevertheless . . .
         I found my father fastened by his bones to his bed, unable to move—that’s the bed, there, in the picture, see the soft field of wood chips the bird is splayed
          out on—a hiss escaping from his lips like air from a leaking canister. Except for his sour wet breath, he was a husk: dirty, dazed, unshaven, unfed. My aunt was in a room nearby, sorting her collection of little boxes into nesting sets. That's one of the nests, there, in the picture. My mother was unconscious on the sofa downstairs—in a drunken sleep, 1 supposed. She won’t feed him, my aunt explained, when 1 confronted her. Of course she won’t, she can’t, I said, not in the shape she’s in (that’s her shape, there, the shadow in the picture); she shouldn’t be allowed near a knife or stove; gee whiz, you can see the situation; you’ve got to take hold; you’ve got to get him into the hospital. Not according to my God,
          I don’t, she said, folding tissue papers into lingerie and blouse boxes with exasperating neatness, as if they were themselves the clothes.
             Not according to my lights, she might have more colloquially put it. Won’t. Can’t. Mustn’t. Shan’t. Out of the question.
             Perhaps you can spot God in the picture of my father’s death—I can’t—unless that’s He in the center, the dead bird’s dead eye—and never in my life before had I heard that name of names in any sentence my aunt uttered. You don't know what it’s like, she said, covering six boxes with one lid, and tapping the top with her index finger as if to say, That’s a fit. Sure I do, I said; I grew up in this loony bin, this rattle pit, we’ve been through this before, more than once, when 1 was younger, then when I was older, now, because now and then 1 visit. Like now. I visit. I come and recommit myself. I drop in. You visit, she said; yes, you visit; but now and then is not the same as every breath. 1 go away to work like somebody taking a vacation. Tie boxes lay in a colorful row across her spread. His buzzer doesn’t work, I said, not wanting to count and counting eight. Red. Striped. White. Covered with wreaths. Gold. Black. Beige. Embossed. When 1 came to this house with your grandmother, my aunt said, we were both visitors. 1 know what it is to visit. We went from relative to relative like tramps from town to town. I held your granny out like an upturned hat. 1 know what it is to visit. I live here now, though—now that mother’s dead. We shared this bed. She died there as quietly as the bolster. I live here now because 1 didn’t leave when I should have. 1 should have packed up, but where would I have gone without your granny as my held-out hat? Visiting is being on the bounce, Billy. Visiting isn’t living. Living is standstill. Living is settling down. Roots in the ground. I just lodge. Potted, like a plant. Seed between the teeth. That’s all 1 do. Here 1 am in this cage of a house, caught like a door’s squeak between two deaths. Between the one upstairs (she picked up a green lid, shiny as satin) and the one downstairs. I’ll call an ambulance, I said. I can't be here all the time, and no help keeps, so he goes hungry. I’ll call, I’ll call right away. I don’t care where your father shits, she said, with a sudden fierceness I had never seen. Death up, death down, death right beside me. In the bedclothes. Like stink. We might have been married, my mother and I. 1 can’t be
       here all the time and no help keeps. I don’t care where your father sleeps. I should have packed up. But—This box is broken—the corner’s crushed—see? So my God is me, Billy, and I don’t worship it. My angel is an extinct bird. I don't have to do good now, that’s my reward, 1 don’t have to care; I’ve been given my hellfire and damnation, my payment for a bad life, in advance; and what was bad about my bad life before but the emptiness of it? She held up rows of stars on a blue ground. This is pretty. I’ll call an ambulance.
         All this unwanted information has been spilled on my clean starched come-to-visit shirt.
         There it is. That’s it. The building in the background, sort of swimming in the sea of the dead self, that's his mortuary. Oh yes. It’s lit at night. Quiet neighborhood. Modern facility, not like some gothic bit of homework that’s been redone into a burial business: bones in the basement where the coal bin was, a living room full of folding chairs, floodlights in the front yard. It’s what happens to reality as you lose all sight of it, like going down for the third time, or even going down for the first, if you are serious about it. See those little spots of pain there like burn holes in a cloud, everything a loose blue like a long gown the girls in the Tabernacle Choir no doubt sing in? and see the sign that says— maybe—tag Sft@p? Actually, that’s what it is: a cloud of spent song, floating along, where all of life’s worries have up and gone.
         Maybe God’s a dead bird now, a black bird’s yellow eye; they say He can occupy anything the way my aunt did when she and her mother—my mum’s mum—came for a visit and stayed and stayed, wearing out years like mats in an entry, until finally there were only the three of them (because I left too, for college and the war); there were just the two women to fight over their duties, over who would serve the arthritis my father served—Lord Knuckle-Under— my aunt not consciously perceiving she was angling for a husband who would leave her happily virgo intacta, angling for a household she’d not be obliged for, slowly pushing her sister out the door while not being blamed for it, occupying the house like an invading army, occupying the closets and the drawers and the bins; and my mother became odd mother out as a consequence, lost the war if not every battle, lost tray and teapot and pillowcases, until everything had gone over but her bottle, her gin to grin with, gin to bear it, while my aunt had her nice new patient, not yet a troublesome cripple, a rent-free room, her own kitchen, and, along with that, wrapping papers to press flat, and hollow boxes to fill with hollow boxes, as she used to say, because come next Christmas you’ll be glad I saved this one back, saved that . . . But she never gave up any, gave up anything, but put you off if you asked her. For anything.
         Maybe God’s a bird’s eye in the picture, but I see only a tree, I don’t see a bird, a bird’s eye. 1 see that the bottom of the world is a lot like the top—in death; and if God, the dead bird, the dead bird’s dead eye, was the body of my
           father's death too, then this is that bird’s bird-sized consciousness, cushioned by the wood chips it was cushioned in, floating like the undertaker’s image in formaldehyde, belly-up like a dead fish—that’s the building in the shot, the undertaker’s hostelry, hotel for the endless night—it’s the way my father’s death looks from the point of view of God, residing in the eye of a dead bird.
             If you don’t believe me, here is a picture of the facade in full light, real as a rabbit’s raisins, as they used to say. Got class. Takes you partway back to Greece and Rome. Detailing like that you won’t come on often, these days.
             Okay. Here is my father’s heart, looking like a rusted pillow. 1 think it’s dad’s. It could be someone else’s, of course. Almost anybody’s. How often do you see anyone’s heart? And you saw how rusted my mother was, toward the end. It could be hers. Still, 1 would have expected hers to resemble—well—a palpitating jelly. This heart is stem, despite the squeezes it has suffered, the bangs and buffets. It’s a wonder even one of them works. Wouldn’t want to lay my head on that hulk, though, however inviting its pillowy chest. There’s something to be said, too, for the patina, a consequence, I have no doubt, of years of exposure somewhere on a sleeve that’s been carried carelessly and waved about in every weather. Who knows what its shape was to begin with? perhaps its sheen was satiny; perhaps it bore stitching which said, “Be my valentine," or Dein ist meinganzes Hen. If there was ever a message, it’s gone now. Ah, where are the snows of . . . and so forth. Yes. Fires burn down. Ice melts. Water evaporates. Fog lifts. Hearts rust. Only rhyme adds up. Only dust accrues.
             I have this bad dream. Although I don’t ski, in my dream I am got up for skiing, and I am riding on a train to the slopes. It’s been a lot of trouble getting my gear together and getting on board. I am wearing big mittens like a catcher’s glove. At last 1 am approaching the place. Then, while I watch with immeasurable anguish out the window, and use my mittens to wipe my breath from the pane, the train travels slowly yet relentlessly through the station; it never pauses, never stops; I pass each letter on the station sign:
                            § T I A H @ ® AT
           or some such, as if I were reading it with my fingers; finally the village disappears in the distance, the landscape changes, and 1 sit among my boots, bags, and skis in despair.
             Loss in life: that’s what I mourn for; that’s what we all mourn for, all of us who have been touched by the fascism of the heart. It’s not having held what was in our hands to hold; not having felt the feelings we were promised by our parents, friends, and lovers; not having got the simple goods we were assured we had honestly earned and rightfully had coming.
             I remember one time crossing France with the First Army, and we were about to go forward against a kraut cannon in a barn, when a kid even younger
      than I, lying by me on the ground, pretending to be a stick, said, Bill, you know what I hate most about getting hit? It’s thinking I might die before I’ve ever had a blow job. I stayed down staring at the bam through parted grass and weeds. The whistle blew, and we went ahead like pheasants into that open field, but my mouth was wet with grinning by then, not because what the kid said was crazy, but because what he said was surely right: that was what was wrong. It was missing out, missing out on anything.
        To look ahead at life and see the future drawing away as though from the rear of a train, and with not even a wave from anyone to pretend we were there (not even a little trash beneath a table, as if there might have been a picnic), to have been battered by life with scarcely a batter in return, a scar on a tree or a mark on a wall, not so much as a “Kilroy” or a look of apprehension in an eye, nothing given, nothing gotten, because nothing was offered and everything refused: to have been had so thoroughly as that is eventually to go about with a black cloth draped over the ruin of the heart—my heart—-the heart you see here, taken by stethoscope; because I was promised this, and got that; because I never used life because life used me, low down where you wipe, so now I’m soiled, flung away, and will be flushed without a look. That’s what I feel when I feel, when I smell; that’s what we all smell, we all feel—this shit on our cheeks from those other cheeks—we members of the Party of the Disappointed People. And were fortune’s crooked wheel to luck us the opportunity; if even a little power should come our way like a windfall from a distant relative’s will; if we had in the bank just enough authority saved up to keep open an account; then what damage we would do, what revenge we would take; just like that bleeding balcony, there, you’re looking at. Must be in Vilnius. In what is left of Jew town. Good bet. That’s how my smile would be, see the rotten spindles? if for the briefest bit of blessed time, I—my habitually helpless hand—once—once—just once—held the whip.
                                     □
        I was hoping for a better moment, a change of mood, a sunset or something, but this picture I promised, of the pump that is the low outcry of my father’s pain, turned up. Not much to look at, yet what could one expect from such a subject: pump pain? not much. Nevertheless instructive. See the spigot where the cry came out? the brand-new nickel handle for the valve? the stiff formality of everything? how the pump is footed like a phallic herma? the green and gray that dominate the scene? the pale leaf light against that distant garage which signifies a letup? for it is, of course, the picture of a physical environment, not merely a shot of some forceful sibilance, cold as the climate, cold as
            you would surely feel if it hissed upon your hand, or as 1 would have felt it if 1 had been nearby enough to interrupt with my fingers the stream of his air as it squeezed between my father’s teeth. 1 snapped him only an instant after he slipped down in the doorway (slipped down, remember, despite my arresting phrase, “fused bones and molten body”), and this is what came out when the drugstore developed it. You can clearly see that the first wash of weakness has passed; that a sort of stillness has taken over, and a broader view is at least momentarily possible. It is, in short, the picture of a spent life, with the pain pump standing in the center, where, in fact, for my father, it did. And from there the world his eyes looked out on, when they weren’t withdrawn by muscle knot, bone bind, and blood clot, was my mother’s mushiness, her wet wandering eyes and pale puffy cheeks, the soft lurch of her walk as she bumped about the house, fending off furniture with her water-filled hands, where her wedding and engagement rings were trapped; so just beyond the garden we see here, with its settled cements and fresh poles, always waiting for spring (though I see a slab or two of walk has slid to one side), is another realm, another self, caught sight of and reflected here the way the light is, passing from a distance through other regions full of life, and taking the taint of them with it, stained by far-off happiness or grief, by grand aspirations and mediocre plans.
                                                 □
              Altogether otherwise is the startled life of the leaf. You can see them there, where the trees have bled onto the street. Autumn puts us in an elegiac mood. The leaves scheme according to the lovely lines of Keats and soon are running in a noisy crowd into some cul-de-sac or weedy cover as if they meant to shape, like a plant playing animal, a hibernating heap for the onsetting snow. That way they can signify, to our sentimental eye, the body of the previous season pretending to be asleep and simply dreaming the icy white sky that's settled on the icy white ground.
              But 1 say we are looking down on the colorful ashes of fulfillment, the parade that greets achievement: the completion of my first book—rather short, rather direct, and hurried into the world while the subject was still warm, if not hot—a collection of observations of the War Crimes Trials I called Nuremberg Notes. The celebration was brief, because reviewers tried me with less compassion than the judges had for Hermann Goering. 1 merely wondered in my book about the real reasons for this legal charade. Charade, they cried, in shock. Charade? To be sure, the Allies hoped to expose the Germans to the world for what they were, so that, when they took revenge upon their enemies, they would seem to be democratic, disciplined, and just; but first of all they
      needed to make sure that these horrors would be greeted with a sense of surprise, as if no one had known, before the judge’s gavel banged and the testimony began concerning what had gone on in the Reich, in the conquered countries, in the camps. So they hung a few symbols. What were these? Not a quiet collaborator in a carload, not the Poles who watched and went about their business and enjoyed the removal of the Jews from their midst, nor the Ukrainians who happily helped. Who of us has not destroyed our enemies in our heads. Suppose but a whisper of our wishes leaked out and half a continent was ready to rise and do your bidding? Orders are easy. Liquidate the trailer parks. Murder motorbikers. Silence the soaps. Clean up the town. Bust up the trusts. It is the killing—hands-on and nearby—that takes fortitude and commitment. And for these opinions—think of it—I was called a Nazi.
                                        □
         Oh, well ... I suppose we can look at it. You will recall that photo of my father's death I took perhaps a year before it realized itself in his breast like a belated bloom. In fact, the shot went almost unnoticed in a roll of snaps of Myrtle Beach—sand and a few birds, some ugly hotels—where my wife and 1 and the kids spent our final vacation as a functioning family. “Functioning family"— what an expression. Let’s see if we can still function as a family, my wife said. You know what we have here, I told her—a butcher shop. Is that the way you want us to function? carve, hack, slice, chop? Anyhow, like the portrait of my father's pain, I got more than I bargained for. I framed one shot—the old man in his surrender suit, down in the dumps in that farmhouse doorway—and got another: of a stiff green pump poking up out of a soiled gauze of snow as if there were a wound below.
         Well . . . what you’re looking at was another surprise. The occasion? a birthday—not Carl’s but his brother's. I went like a good dad to every desolate region of the party to collect the obligatory images. Another year dead, gone, ungrieved. Good. Hold it. Smile at mummy. I’m too old to smile at mummy. Right, son, we re all too old for that. So no smile. How about a frown? a long frown, long as your pants. Sag your face, son. Turn all your cute little corners down. When the prints came back, I shuffled through the heads balloons had hid, the faces sweets had smeared, hunting for one shot that hadn’t been mugged, only to come upon this ungainly image—the one you’re looking at.
         These are the gravestones of my children, waiting to be put in place—stones raised, kids pitched, I guess—who knows where or when, as the song says. Into the grave-space of the painfully remembered. My wife insists I've already buried them. What does she know about burial? She’s buried in the fat she’s
           stored about herself. That’s what she knows about burial. What a silo knows, she knows. A granary. That’s what she knows.
              So these are their memorials. One of us will have to buy a pair. Martha says she won’t survive me. It’s one of her jokes. I think the photograph predicts the purchase, don’t you? One of us will pay through the nose, too; you know these guys who trade in death, sell holes in the ground and bronzy boxes filled with fluff as though they were Chevrolets—real grief grabbers. A soft ride. That’s Carl on the left. He’s our Mr. Wisenheimer, the firstborn. Can’t pass math, but knowsitall. Can’t pass French, but whoneedsit. Can’t pass social studies, but can make out on the couch.
              And then that’s . . . there, on the right . . . that’s the little one’s name tag, Mister Mysterious, shyly slipping out of the picture. I don’t know who the middle stele stands for, the one with the bumper sticker. You don’t suppose its presence means we re going to have a third? No. Not a chance. Mrs. Untouchable makes sure of that. I couldn’t get close on skis, or by wearing a Douglas Fairbanks mask. Though it’s not true my middle leg has a permanent limp like she says. Anyway, I don’t get up for just any slot-clock that goes clang. As my colleague Culp says, you can’t screw without a driver. That’s one comfort.
              But is there any greater injustice than having to go hungry half a life? No wonder I’m a founding member of the party.
              So, then, whose rusty soul-weight is it? Looks heavy. Not even Christ could rise with that on his head. Maybe it means I’m going to back up over some tyke in my driveway. Perhaps we’re in a neglected corner of the cemetery, and that’s the gravedigger’s shed in the background. Perhaps I care about my kids and this question expresses my concern—the question on the sticker which asks whether I’ve hugged my kids today? My kids don’t want me hugging them. I might have thought these were tablets of the law from the look of them, but the law doesn’t ask questions, especially ones so easy to answer with a lie. My concern is I don’t care. Paving stones are they? by the look of them. An ancient ruin rises up to reinvent destruction.
              Not every father gets to see the final place marks of his children. The design has a contemporary look and they stand there in a row as if their subjects were to be wiped out at once, in a car crash or some other fell swoop. I wish I could think the world would feel their loss. Here I am, bright as a light, and what does she bear me but a pair of dim bulbs. I look out at all the upturned smoothy faces in my classes, and I realize, as I try to stuff one more history of horror in their ears (which results in their further horror of history), that most of these young people will never surpass their parents. At much of anything. Not even par. This is new, I think, in our society. My father drove slow, as I said, so I could finally go by him (though he didn’t want me to learn to drive). But these
     kids, it’s hard for them, they even have soft loose scarfy losers’ names like Heather, for heaven's sake, and Kimberly, Darin with one r and Krystal with a K. I’m a William; I’m a Frederick: the monikers of conquerors. I warned Martha when she named the one on the right who is slipping from the sight of the shutter that if she dared to give him the mean and spiteful name she said she might, I'd never utter it, never let it pass my lips even in a scold, never write it down, even for a school excuse, never acknowledge it . . . and I haven’t. Of course, I’ve had to write the word a thousand times, but never in the service of my son’s name. Never. On a rare occasion, in extreme circumstances, l may have been driven to use the initial. After all, A is really harmless enough, even if A is the scarlet letter. Listen, I said, the kids are going to call him Coke-a-Kohler anyway, you know they will, so why give him any more trouble than we know he’s sure to have? They’re going to ask: hey, Kohler, how often do you flush? You're a drip, Kohler, you know that? They’re going to say: hey, Kohler, don’t leave the lid up. He’s my child, Martha said, you never wanted him, so he’s mine to name. I ought to call him Albatross, after you. Okay, I told her, name him Nimrod, name him Phibby, name him Amaryllis, if you want to, but not— Maybe I’ll call him Otto or Hermann. Okay, call him Otto, Hermann, Heinrich, anything, so long as it’s not—his.
       Yet that’s what came home on his birth certificate. It turns out she hates the name. Naturally, she hates the name. She chose it out of spite—that was plain enough. She gave the kid the name of my obsession. She named him after me. Now I get the blame for letting her do it, for going along, giving in. It’s what you wanted, she tells me. By opposing her, I egged her on, she says. She cursed the kid with a terrible curse, because who could measure either up or down to such a nomination? And after having him, after cursing him, after saddling herself, myself, and society, with an unmentionable brat, she took up genealogy with the greed of a Mormon; got fat as a Caesar, and as slow to move (her family trees grew faster); whereupon she cursed me with her coldness, and emptied me from her embrace like an armload of dirty clothes, a pot of chamber water.
           HERE LIES YOUNG ANONYMOUS KOHLER
          WHO DIED FROM A PROLONGED LACK OF REFERENCE
                                  □
       Who or what in the world is this one?
       I don’t know whether to look at it again, or look at my response.
       It is, I think, a photograph of an eye, an eye oddly washed with tears, as if the lens were weeping. An eye seen by an eye, then. Eye to eye. Because of the
            tears, one’s view of the eye is blurred, the lashes look fuzzed, maybe frayed, as from long use, and the lid, for the eye is half closed—so it seems—is lined, the skin chipped as if it were paint, indeed, it’s aged the way shutters age, this skin. But perhaps all this belongs to the camera, and describes its condition. I’m seeing, possibly, an eye reflected from the protective glass cap on the lens of a camera. Which accounts for its weary, underwater look. Eye in an eye.
              It doesn’t belong here.
                                             □
             Home again, home again, hippity crash. Things have gone sour, things have gone smash.
             This depicts my father’s thinness during his final days, his stiffness in the joints, yet their disconnection, even though it is actually a formal portrait of my wife and children functioning as a family. Well, of course, you will all recognize this famous photo—I cannot deny it—by Jorge Adamafski—of the Family of Man.
             Home again, indeed. I found my father stuck in his sheets. There are prisoners, I’m told, who feel homesick for the penitentiary. In any case, the word ‘homesick’ is succinct and honest—spade's a spade.
             Yes. I found my father stuck in his sheets. Dried piss and shit smears, I suppose, some drool and sweat, his bedsores, too, had fastened him to the cloth like glue, like meat left too long in the butcher’s paper. His hair was stiff, as you can see, his breath was foul, naturally, his mouth was wider open than his eyes. I called an ambulance. 1 alerted his doctor. I phoned a few friends whose lines were busy. How often had I done this. These painful scenes run queasily together. Repetition makes one memory and spares the memory its repetitions. It was a shameful situation. I ran into the backyard for a smoke, hurrying past my mother who lay on the couch like a careless pile of cushions. Death has always embarrassed me, and every sickness sickens. I shall probably hide in a closet during my own. I knew from experience that if the hospital managed to bring my father round—feed him and bathe him and get him to move (as they had before)—they would soon send him home to puddle and dry and cleave to his sheets again—puddle and dry and cleave—his joints sealing themselves shut, his aches felt everywhere like air, inescapable, continuous, identical with being and its breath—all bone, all brittle transmission of helpless clench—dry compaction—as if one’s marrow had eaten one’s flesh and skin, and drunk one’s phlegm.
             Death is the last thing we can call our own. I was afraid that at any moment my father’s neighbors, the Bangels, would appear. They could smell death as easily as a pot of kraut. Their religion allowed them to enjoy dying, and they
      would come to do my father's dying for him. There are always so many volunteers to do our dying, to order us into hell, see us off, but they can be counted on to leave our death alone, to leave the train before it reaches the end of the line. The pieces you see laid out here, in this still life made of machine parts, are bits of a train, too, that’s pretty obvious. They have been taken apart to be differently together, to represent disjunction as though on the field of a flag. A gray-blue ground—asphalt, isn’t it?—unites them: spanners, bars, bolts, steel door, lug. The Pullman they came from was being stripped so that the car could be restored to service in an armored train. Men with torches detached them, then threw the parts away so they fell haphazardly into the peaceful arrangement appreciated by this portrait. The train, 1 was told, would be put in service in South America.
        The Bangels would pray by his bedside—I had seen them before, bless their hyena-hungry souls—and there would be delight in their downcast eyes. Their holy psalms would be as stuffed with sincere falsehood as any whispers of ardent love. But death itself they had no words for—only the Great Before and the Great Beyond, not the Ditch you’d end in. They would leave my father’s death alone, politely, the way you leave on the platter the last piece of meat.
        My father greeted his death as a friend, for it was his own lifeless body, after all—no stranger—he could still lay claim to: the grave of his will, the ash heap of his anger. Let’s end this painful visit, he said, in the unnaturally bright voice of a stricken diva, and at first I believed that death was his visitor, that death was addressed, but later I preferred to think that it was life—his life—he bid his terse adieu to. Unlike politicians, merchants, parents, lovers, death promises nothing. Unlike politicians, merchants, parents, lovers, death doesn’t disappoint. They baptized me with pee, my father used to say. I wonder what was used to bless the passing of his pain. At last you draw a blank and not a breath. You say a silent farewell, you wave as one does in the movies, looking backward over your shoulder, you leave the Party of the Disappointed People. When there is no more punch in the bowl, and no more film in the camera.
        So, my father said to me, lets end this painful visit, and with a weak arm 1 hadn’t thought was strong enough, shooed me from his sickroom. Perhaps out of the sight of my eye his knotted bones undid themselves and he slid apart as you see here these train parts have, achieving the composure of decomposition.
        Bits and pieces. That’s the picture.
                                        □
        1 indecently hurried, as 1 said, into the backyard for a smoke. I pretended I was far away in a world I d never visited where there were trees like tent poles holding the heavens over me, and where the gods grinned in the grass and their
             laughter shook the leaves and hilariously shaped the tree trunks. There are moments of real belief in this life. There are moments of relief. Then 1 heard voices from the front of the house. It would be the help I’d called for, or it would be the Bangels with satchels to carry off our sorrows. 1 voted for the stretcher. What a pleasure to be imprisoned in a tree. 1 returned reluctantly through the kitchen, dragged by duty, in time to see the ambulance men carrying my mother out the door. I wanted to weep at the absurdity. Instead, I flung about myself a landscape of surpassing beauty. 1 plucked images out of childhood: a sugarloaf land through which one moved without moving as though afloat. Images of quiet, of a stillness so serene no scream or sound of breaking glass or cross complaint could ruffle it. No—not that one, I shouted, pointing at the ceiling. Not that one—the other one—the one upstairs—on the bed in the bedroom—in the room upstairs. That one—not this one.
                I imagine a simple craft to carry me away. A boat you could pole. A life you could flow with, scenes along a lovely bank. In great bewilderment yet without a word, the two young men turned around and rolled my mother softly back upon the sofa, so carefully they didn’t break her snores. I sought peace in the dingy rear of my head like a storekeeper about to be burgled. Red-faced they went upstairs then with their sling slung between them, gently shouldering aside my aunt who had let them in and stood now like someone distributing pamphlets at the foot of the stairs. You would have let them haul my mother out of the house like a bundle of old clothes for the Goodwill, 1 thought. Where is my lake, my little low boat, the reeds I shall moses in until Egypt has blown over? My aunt was signing off her responsibility with a smirk. I boarded up my shattered windows. I boarded up my jimmied door. I painted over my invaded eyes with pale paint. That’s the one, 1 said, in a tone, I'm afraid, of sordid satisfaction, when the ambulance men shortly reappeared and carefully descended. I wanted to reassure them, to say, it’s all right now, that’s well done. Instead I went down in the absurd for the third time. I shall follow you in my car, I told them, but my car wouldn't start, flooded by a foot that was still in flight and wouldn’t stop kicking the pedal. I had to borrow the Bangels’.
                                                     □
                I think we have run out of snaps. Run out before the story’s over. That’s quite usual, of course. I think there’s only one click left that isn't black. For old times, I’d like to take your photo. I feel, by now, you are a part of the family. Almost anyway. Wait just a moment more while I fiddle with the settings. Under here, beneath this cloth, my hand can touch you in private. Well, my mother, if you want to know, would wake up and not even wonder. She had missed the going,
      so why should she miss the gone? There. Okay, smile, because in a sec I am going to take your picture. That way you can join us in the album. A photo, as Jorge Adamafski took, of the Family of Man. That’s it—smile—terrific—say pretty Polly or pretty please. Smile . . . wider . . . hold it . . . smile.
                    Child Abuse
         The crying was like the sound of an approaching train. The ldd was still in his crib but the crying came toward me, propelled by my attention, getting louder and louder until its din made me dizzy. Of course I had tried to feed him, change him, burp him, hold him, jolly him up, encircle him with soothing sighs, and I had felt his head for fever, but it was hot from hollering and not a useful test. If I hold his nose, he’ll have to breathe through his mouth, and then he’ll stop. I walked him about slung over my shoulder, lahdeedah, where his howls could enter my ear without obstruction. They rang as though I were at Quasimodo’s business.
         I am a man of education. I have fought my way out of the jungle of one family only to find myself lost in the desert of another. What a dreadful—incomprehensible—mistake! Of what, with what, could I have been thinking! With my cock of course. So then had kids, fathered them, my own fault, what folly! When kids were creatures I understood, knew through and through, knew enough not to engender. I had been one. No. I was twice one once, the so-called handful, equal of two. And so 1 knew. Even back then, and of course now. Through and through. Kids were criminals in hiding. Kitchycoo, you little shit-ter. Upsydaisy, piss pad. Daddy’s here and daddy loves you. Daddy's ears are bald from your bellowing; his earwax has lost its lost-wax shape; and he has reconsidered. It does not appear to him as any longer necessary to perpetuate the human race. The price of a fuck has grown too great. The cost of everything rises. So does daddy’s little darling have a bellyache? Izzatit? Their skulls are so soft, boneless as butter, their heads so smooth, and sometimes they even smell good, cuddled against your cheek like a warm water bottle. If I had a sore tooth.
         Tonight I am more than the baby’s father. I am the baby’s sitter. Martha has gone to a meeting of some kind and left me alone with little Lord Poop who, for me, wouldn’t eat, wouldn't burp, wouldn’t even spit up a bit to make me feel I’d found the cause, now won’t sleep, won’t coo, crying is his occupation, it’s a pity but crying won’t kill him, never seems to weaken anything but my resolve, never seems to bother him afterward, no guilt, no remorse over the fate of all
            that swallowed air, no bitterly tearful memories; but, say I, he will be a father himself someday, deserving of everything he gets too, and then that crying will return to haunt him, he’ll be hollered at by his own voice transmitted through his brood to be thrown back at the face that first made it, just as, 1 suppose, 1 am suffering now for the squalling I compelled my parents to endure, though my yelling was my father's, if we’re going to be fair and consistent, and his bawling was, in turn, his dad’s cry-babying back through time when Cain and Abel invented caterwauling (and put I’s in all the spelling of the words for it) in order to punish their parents for having them, probably at God’s instigation, who did a bit of bellowing Himself, now and then, since no one ever does what their father tells them, no one ever learns, in time, to say no to the serpent, hanging as it is from their own limbs, to see that sex is only an apple, grown like a cyst around a worm, and once bitten is soon swallowed, while the sin of it goes on forever, one thing leading to another, because it's not some social disease (what a term) we need to watch out for, but the calamity of pregnancy, another bad apple (the new ma throws up at the thought): it takes years off your life, ruins any prospect you might have for happiness, poisons your youth with every sort of tiresome task, middle age with grasping ingrates, your old age with stingy indifference; and if there were a god, and if there were a god who did create, then he’d have the cock squirt scotch at climax, oral sex would produce a genuine and delightful lassitude, Eden would not have been needed, everywhere there’d be taps eager to be turned and free drinks on the house, instead of the Colic King I must bear about in my broken arms, and pretend to billy coo at—there there, there there—and rockabye and itty-bitty—while the creature screams as if it were being struck, good idea, a little shake might malt its milk, restore its sense of who is boss, because when you have run down the checklist of possible causes, and taken every precaution known to Poppa Doc, and then some, and the Prince of Wailers still persists, then you begin to suspect what you were sure of from the first, that the kid’s doing it just to be obnoxious, just to affront, as my own dad always said: God gave you a mouth, first to complain, then to sass, next to lie, finally to say "1 do,” and momentarily even to mean it.
              A screamer. What do you do with a screamer? You put them in their crib in a nicely darkened room and you quietly close the door on the noise and let them scream it out. Out through the keyhole, out under the door, out through the pasteboard walls, simply can’t stand it, so you stuff a little gum in the keyhole, there’s no key anyway, no need for a working lock, and you pack a wet towel in the crack which runs along the foot of the door, as if you were containing smoke, and the house were on fire, it is on fire, it feels on fire (1 feel hot like I’ve been hollering, and the blood is up in my face, fat lot of good, the
       walls are too thin and vibrate to his howls, I can feel it in my palm when 1 press it in a well-meant mimic of agony against the wall, don’t pound, don’t shout, keep calm, the kid needs a beating, but wait till he’s learned to stand, then you can knock him down); how you want to make your escape out of the incessant sound, it must be the way the Fuhrer’s voice fell upon his generals, because it seems to have surrounded you, your marriage is a monastic cell, there is no god, and the baby is the bell which calls you to your chores, your prayers, your rounds; large and smothery (which has mother in it) the sound is, over, around and inside your ears, in the head like an ache, loud, demanding, that’s almost the worst, not as if in pain, this voice, but in tantrum, in tyranny, in trip-hammer time the blood beats up in the ear too (as if 1 needed another noise), and you are trying to talk to yourself over and in and out of the din, like flying a plane through a movie storm; these are thoughts of the grimmest kind, too, which you can’t stop coming into consciousness, although they’re thoughts you can’t hear on account of the racket which is causing them; but you mustn’t pound on the walls and you mustn’t think throttle, no, you simply pocket your passport and slip away over the border as if you were avoiding the war (the children of alcoholics are healers like the Herschel in me, they crack jokes like my Culp at his Culpabilities, or they run away and hide like most of the rest of me, that's what they say—who says? they . . . they . . . they say); no, don't think throttle, or how you were badgered into fucking for this baby as if it were a golfing trophy (I was not even seduced, my penis was promised nothing, instead 1 was won over by weeping and terrorized by threats), you haven’t been promoted yet (1 hadn’t been), your quarters are too small (ours were), your salary buys pasta, rice, and beans, you can't afford a pet, so here you are (1 am) holding the last of the howler monkeys like a phone to your ear (my ear, mine, where the din is); but 1 mustn’t think throttle, must keep the head clear, shut up shut up shut up shut up you little shit shut shit shut shut, good idea to just put the kid in its crib in its room down the hall in the damn dark and let it moan at no moon until it wearies of its own meanness and falls asleep, what a way to do it! tear streaked; drop the package like a bomb, let it bay on Berlin, am I holding you too tight, little tyke? yid kids probably yipe like they were being kicked or at least pinched, that’s what dogs do, yelp, how must it sound in his ear, 1 bet the soprano doesn’t hear herself how she sounds singing in the tenor’s tympanum, but he at least gets his own back, sprays her with high-C spit, hey, maybe bellow for bellow like the code of Hammurabi, he howls in my ear, 1 howl in his, then he knows what it’s like; nor is the nookie better now she’s got her way and the bun is out of the oven and she has realized herself as a woman and 1 have carried on the family name with little Caca Kohler, lot he cares about a name, he just hates life, hear him? wants to die, go back to his little
          grass box in the cemetery, we could pretend to be devastated, collect sympathy and covered dishes, don’t try to do anything now, poor dears, after such a loss and full of bereavement, why not take a vacation in the tropics? oh oh, that broke the bel low in the middle, maybe I dropped him a bit far, still it’s just his bunk, his wind went on vacation for a second, still he’s howling hard enough now, can’t be hugely hurt, bye bye birdie baby, what’s it called, “infant syndrome”? no, "crib death,” or he could put his head through the bars somehow, who could have figured, why not a Caribbean cruise, no sea high enough, nothing that far, for even though I’m in the hall 1 can hear him screaming plain as a pin’s pain, but I checked that, checked it, no, he’s just mean and how about the backyard if we had a backyard that's where I would go get out into the night let it cover me but however far would not be far enough I’d hear him squalling like a wind on the—yeah—high sea, 1 guess it does, scream in the rigging like a what? banshee; shit shut, shit shut, there’s no end to this, animals gnaw their trapped limbs loose, what have 1 done to him to deserve this, left here in howl hell, what circle is it? where those who have failed to practice sufficient selfabuse listen lifetime after lifetime to babies breaking wind, babies mewling, babies kickaheeling their dummies, babies rhythmically ahgah ahgah ahgahing like a starting car, meanwhile mommy is off with other mommies self-congratulating themselves for having wombs, and making their bodies more pud-abundant by the minute, after all daddy’s done it no more need for him in that regard, now merely a monetary man, why am I fat now? well, why is she? well, my father didn’t put me through college, I did that on my own, only every whimperingly dimpled whelp these days expects you to pay their way into heaven, will he never stop, better look in again, just did, don’t go near him, every minute of this screaming seems an hour, infanticide is wholly understandable, don’t they test our limits though, bring our anger up to the edge of our ear, until we can feel how good it would be to bounce them off the wall, tennis anyone, what a racket, jokes don’t work either, all 1 can think of is what I hear and all I hear is him.
             The entire culture connives at it: parenthood is the proper aim of life; the family is the sacred center, happiness is having a home where the kiddie cars roam; so hey hey, dad, labor for a future you'll be dead in while your dough lives on in sonnyboy’s pocket, in daughter’s dowry, in your widow’s oceanview condo, or plays for peanuts in a bingo hall full of fat momma smoke.
             Maybe he can't bawl as well on his belly. Yes, I should turn him over, let him raise his bleating head up, bob about like a tender blossom in the breeze. Just as you are about to kill them they turn cute—survival tactic—not this time. Not this time. Not a cute in his car load.
             It was very dark, 1 remember. My thoughts had been about as I have described them. My feelings, though, were more complex, strands intertwined,
      twisted, my chest tight enough I found breathing difficult, head hurting as if my ears had been boxed, and there he is in his cage howling away a dark shape and I am shouting shut up shouting as loud as 1 am able a big burst of UP, forcefully pushed out like a blow, T UP. I have both hands on the crib rail and 1 am shaking the bed back and forth, pushing it away, bringing it back, thrusting and jerking, yelling SH AH T, the baby's body rolling to one side and then to another until it is bouncing against the far rail which raps it over and returns it to the other side, LA LA BY, 1 am yelling, LA LA BY BAY BEE you bastard, shut up shut up, push pull, shut shut, up and down, the crib banging like the baby against the wall until 1 fling the rail loose from my fists and flee—that's the right word—flee from the room with my hands—really—over my ears, still shouting from both the top and bottom of my being yet in a moment relieved because I can still hear the kid crying, no, 1 haven't killed him, crying now hysterically so I’m madder yet if that is imaginable, I am furious that this beast has brought me to this pass, at what he’s made me do to him, the world has heard, 1 am shamed, and 1 slam my palms against the wall they hurt they sting 1 think I’ve jammed a thumb how 1 hate my life, this kid, my wife, me, 1 will not will not burst into tears but 1 do stop screaming and then slamming and I'm heaving, my chest burns as if 1 were breathing the acid in my stomach, great fiery globe in my throat, 1 will not will not be sick, throw up on the shit he throws up on me no way to get even anything you do gets you deeper in deeper in deeper in, so my gasps begin to slow and now 1 can feel mainly my palms stinging and the kid s cries seem more distant, he’s all right, okay, I guess, 1 am leaning against this stupid plasterboard partition I could run through with a little start to get up steam, and should, run right through it, should, that would make a statement, because there is nothing I can say, now, nothing I can do, 1 have this crying kid in the next room and I’m supposed to go in and pick him up and comfort—comfort?—comfort him, there there, it's okey doke, say that, go ahead, to my ruined life, there there, don't cry, it's okay, but who will fix, for there’s no mommydaddyyumyum for me, no, we grow up, assume responsibilities, make our w;ay, lucky us, have kids.
                 Foreskinned 1 1
         1 don't know' w'hether my father was adamant about it or merely careless, although his anti-Semitism inclines me to favor the first alternative. In any case, 1 w'as not circumcised. If he bragged that he had brought me home w'hole, or believed that he had saved me from some primitive and barbaric rite, or spared
           me the pain of the knife, he did not repeat any such opinions in an ear old enough to understand them. There might have been other reasons: retaining the option—leaving the decision, as it were, to me—preferring the superior sensitivity of the capped cock, approving the esthetic of an unscarred member, appreciating the foreskin’s versatility, and so on, although these seem to me not very likely now, knowing something of my father’s nature.
              However it happened, my penis was a problem from the beginning. It was necessary, for those reasons of hygiene which circumcisers have always emphasized, to roll the prepuce back periodically and wash well beneath it, something which very young youngsters can scarcely be trusted to do. For as long as I can remember, 1 have been embarrassed by the existence of my widdler (as it was then called), and that same aura of shame surrounded its character, function, and condition, since it was what you pissed with; pissing was a dirty business to be got through as quickly and efficiently as possible, without staring, too, except to aim, unless one were lucky enough to have the opportunity to urinate out of doors, onto ants and anything else which might scurry, into sand which might subside, on burning leaves which might sizzle nicely, or against a wall where the stream might design a stain or leave a scented signature.
              I was also in the habit (one to which 1 still occasionally revert) of peeing while sitting down—like a girl, my father said scornfully the one time he caught me at it. Yet sitting, 1 wouldn’t have to hold it. 1 could simply push it down between my legs and let it squirt. No danger of missing the target. Because I was sitting down, I could continue to read my book, a reason I still think has merit. But calling sitwiddling something girls did (how did I know what girls did?) was a powerful inhibitor. If girls did it, it was not desirable. That was enough to know.
              My father called it my widdler. I had no name for it. Except it. One did it, did it with it, and then forgot it. Forgot to flush, too, half the time. However, 1 soon learned that kids any age are fascinated by everything in the bathroom but brushing teeth and their own bathing. Shaving is an especially curious custom. 1 too liked to watch my father lather himself and then scrape that fearful gleaming blade across his throat, up his cheeks, beneath his nose. The soap would disappear in a stream of steaming water, the blade would shine again, advertising its sharpness, whereupon sideburns would be shortened, or errant hairs removed. Although my father complained about it, clearly here was another thing girls didn’t do, only dads did, and if dads did it, it was desirable.
              What dad did was escape harm. His face emerged unscathed from the apparently fatal passage of the blade. It was magical, like watching fakirs walk barefooted over hot coals. As interested as I was, I was always relieved when the razor got folded up and put away on a high shelf. The sounds shaving made:
       that short scrape, the burst of water in the bowl, the blade's flat slap on the strop, where you seemed to smooth a length of leather so as to sharpen some steel to shave a face—a peculiar process, I thought—these were regular and reassuring; they meant that life was going on in what was then its serene way, just as you pulled your widdler out, as thoughtlessly as lolling your tongue, and did it, sleepy from sleep, in the early a.m.—the first of the day’s duties—and then pulled it back into your pants with a jerk of your rump, and forgot it, often forgetting to button, too. I began with snaps, grew to buttons, and went on to zippers when zippers appeared. Buttons were a bother. One often didn’t do them up. Who cared? Well, of course, mother cared. But who cared anyhow? A buttonless world would be better, I’m sure I thought. Well, now we have one, and it isn’t.
         One’s weenie had a score of names, as did the balls; they changed as your cock aged, and I could have taken one of them for mine, I suppose, or called it, like a dog, Collins, or like an explorer, Columbus, taken Dick or Tommy or Peter on, but 1 never thought about it. No. It wasn’t ever my prick, dork, or dong. The poor thing was nameless. Maybe I felt all along that it really was a poor thing, even before the inevitable comparisons were made for me, always with leers, with grins, at the school gym or the Y where I learned to swim or later in the army's short-arm inspections (mine was not an arm, short or long, I was told, mine was a pinkie dickie). The razzing 1 received was harrowing. In my squad I was called ‘Big Bill,’’ or “Monster Dong.” Funny as hell.
         Brits are said to say Willy. Willy?
         More and more men, in those days, were being circumcised; the army trimmed a lot of guys; and doctors would prescribe it for prospective grooms who were fearful of premature ejaculation. So it no longer made a Jew of you. To free the cock from its cowl wasn’t, alone, a rabbi’s duty, and, of course, the mutilation eventually became so common I had it done to my kids, so they wouldn’t look, as Martha argued, different from the other boys. Suppose our kids had been born in a country of noseless men, would you recommend denosing them, I asked without effect. She might have pleaded the prepuce’s cause—that would have shown some delicatesse, since 1 had one—but all she cared about, as far as I could see, was the judgment of our babies’ peers.
         The well hung, I would find, swaggered about the gym in their jaybirds, and liked to run and jump so their cocks flopped. No question, its measure was the measure of you as a man. Later (too late) I could have pointed proudly to those classical statues which represented the penises of heroic Greeks peeking out of a tuffet of curly hair like a snail stretching from its shell to take a step: discreet, foreskinned, inoffensive, hardly the proud masculine spike of those alternative songs and stories, which would come along in more corrupt times.
             Size, in short, was clearly not a sexual consideration. Besides, the Greeks liked boys. Besides, buggery is less painful if the inserted member is of more modest and manageable dimensions. Besides, you can swallow the entire shaft of a small one. These advantages were lost on me then, became useless later, are pointless now. In a mob of boys or a mob of men, the mob always wins.
             The big dick is the first bully. It begins by bullying its possessor. The shortest guy in my squad we called Brownie, 1 remember. His balls were the size of marble sacks. His cock belonged in an automobile engine. It was the length of a connector hose. And Brownie thought he had to live up to the largess he enjoyed, so he got in fights and was knocked about a lot. Sock ’em with your schlong, we suggested, but his pride was unimpressively in his pants, so lesser guys would whop him without regard for symbolic reality. What am I going to do with that, the whores would say to Brownie. The sirens sang the same song to me.
             1 learned how reluctantly big ones enlarge when growing erect, they simply sort of unkink and stiffen, whereas wee ones like mine quadruple themselves the way Popeyes muscles swell immediately when they're spinached. None of this knowledge then mattered. Except on the few occasions when we kids groped one another, we didn’t engage in show-and-swell. We showered and swam and stood bareassed, buddy to buttock, in army lines, glancing indifferently about as the heterosexed should (no fairies in foxholes), but catching sight of shapes and sizes, nevertheless, out of the curious corners of our eyes.
             If women are tormented by the size and condition of their breasts, men are tormented by men. In the army I had no colleagues, not even ones I could despise, as now. Even the officers were slobs. 1 did interrogations, which were unpleasant enough; nevertheless I didn’t capture, 1 questioned, usually out of the hearing of guns. A cruder lot of comrades could not be imagined, not even by a Dante intent on furnishing hell with louts. I did hope they would all be killed. I didn’t care if our position were overrun. Maybe fools would sound less foolish speaking German. 1 certainly did everything I could to keep my little ickie-dickie-doodle out of their sight, but it was not always possible, since soldiers were “thrown together” like sacked spuds. Snobbery, a set of attitudes I incline to, became my Maginot Line, and was equally effective. Disdain didn’t do any good. Haughtiness is lost on lowlifes. Subtlety is a lost cause. War does brutalize, 1 suppose, but these guys were brutes to begin with. For a time I was convinced that nations went to war just so a bunch of boys could flick towels at one another's butts. Yes, my buddies-in-short-arms were certainly hostile tc me—their teasing was unremitting, merciless—yet, as with everything else, they didn’t know what hostility was. Across the line, some of the Nazis knew They fought as if their souls were shooting the guns.
          In college I was called Mister Minnow. Or Tiny Tim. Fuck frat men. Do you practice logarithm?
          So I stayed pretty much out of touch, even when I didn’t know how wee my widdler was. Of course, widdlers were all wee. My father had the pisser. Nor would kids like me say they tinkled or had a tinkler. That was adult nomenclature, as full of euphemistic condescension as we were of moist mistakes; besides, only girls tinkled. To sit and tinkle was not desirable. Our word (not my word but my set’s word) for the organ was ‘weenie.’ Eventually, I would understand that there were formal and family names, your personal and your peers’ names, often the same, and then those "given” names—their names—(and “they” were vaguely parents, snobs, strangers, and other enemies, whose terminology you employed at your peril); there were names for every stage and age and form and function; names suggesting a range of attitudes from contumely to adoration; names for parts of one’s private parts, indeed, even names for the parts of those; names for intimacies only doting couples could have conceived; names designed to be as remote and noncommittal as possible: ‘it,’ the aforementioned pronoun, neutral as a knife, ‘there,’ for an unspeakable place—“1 hope you don’t touch yourself there”— and thing,' a word one wore like a rubber glove; there were naturally names for diseases and failures and malformations, for idealized organs and realized dreams, for substitutes and extenders and dildoesque aids, foreign words and phrases, medical and scientific terms, business lingo and amusing mala-props.
          The mirror above the sink would steam, and once or twice, with my finger passing through the fog, I drew a dong like one I might desire. I stopped that, though, when I discovered the fingerline remained, after the glass had cleared, like a shadow’s incriminating print. There, smudged over the inverted bathroom scene, was the image of a length of frayed rope.
          Though I refused to christen it, my widdler received a few names nevertheless, the last being Violet, which was conferred upon it by Martha, in recognition of its habit of withdrawing, first into itself, and then into me, whenever it had shot its bolt, became embarrassed, or whenever I was frightened, anxious, in case it was cold.
          My weenie was, in fact, a little wormlike model of my soul, and whether I had grown like it over time, or it had proved to mimic me, I will never know; but my self-image, if that was what it was, would shrivel so it seemed to be nothing more, sometimes, than a circle of foreskin like a puddle of clothes which have fallen about absent feet; and I often rather ruefully wondered what would have become of me, if my father had had my foreskin snipped. I might have sat to tinkle afterward because 1 could manage no manlier way. I’d be a
           she. And if I were a she, I'd let gin go guggle into me till 1 was gone the way my mother did, and otherwise remain, wet as a cave, dark as this thought, out of my own sight, where no knowledge might reach me, anyone’s pity or anyone’s mourning.
              On the other hand, I also often thought that it was the prepuce which prevented its penis from coming fully forward; that was why the otherwise stalwart Greeks were so puny, and furthermore why the practice of circumcision had been undertaken: to increase the size of the instrument by releasing the cock from its confining cap like a Chinese lady’s foot from its binding or the hoy from its hobble.
              I still cannot cut the lead foil from a wine bottle without the sense that my peeling is part of a process of release. As the cork’s pull is preliminary to the champagne’s pop.
              But the Party of the Disappointing Penis needed a leader, and I was called.
           I had to answer such a summons. I had to debunker myself and confront my fate. Well, the Fiihrer had gathered an army of dorks to toast his weenie, what would 1 do to similarly celebrate mine? Alas, my worm has merely, weakly, wiggled, left a word, a faint image on a defogged page, although not in the shape of a denied dream, but as a representation of reality, for reality is faint, lonely, far from hardy, small, no one’s care, a residue of frayed rope, inadequately named.
              Touch it not. 1 was taught.
              I am sure, when I was bathed, my mother withdrew the skin to suds my bud. The occasion’s beyond my ken. I am sure, when I was washed, everything went off without a hitch. Older, it was my father who would get after me, nag me about it, but it was an embarrassing subject for him (that’s easy for me to understand), and the topic got dropped. Meanwhile, neglected, my foreskin adhered to its head. They were one. Who cared anyhow?
              The damn doctor did. Alas, I hadn’t the words to hate him with then. I was taken for a checkup, and during some unnecessarily humiliating pawing about, my condition was discovered: I was fat; 1 was flatfooted; I hated shots; 1 had scars on my eardrums, wax in my ears, my pinkie fingers were double-jointed; I had exceptional vision and a mole that ought to be burned off; 1 broke wind a lot; 1 couldn’t pull my prepuce back. Imagine being asked.
              The doctor comforted my parents, who were shocked, ashamed, unamused: at least he doesn’t play with himself, he said. I wonder if this opinion helped.
              Attempts to accomplish what, after all, was a tiny task produced screaming which I even now remember reverberating through the examining room. Perhaps a tray of instruments had spilled. 1 have forgotten the pain. However, 1 can hear my outcries still, remote from me, as though they were made by a jun-
      gle bird. I imagine these wails were not well received in the waiting room where waiting children pretended to play with alphabet blocks and, until they heard me, believed their parents, who had told them there was a Santy Claus, and who had repeatedly reassured them: it won’t hurt.
        The hurt was of two kinds: there was the pain from the doctor’s fingers and the pressure they were exerting, as well, of course, as the agony the skinning caused; and there was the shame of my molestation, the burning 1 felt in my face, before I began to cry, as if I had been crying already a long time. On the doctor’s part there’d be some small success, I’d scream; he’d stop; in a moment he’d begin again (my parents, by now, had been sent away, and were waiting with the other parents and their children, embarrassed, I’m sure, grim and gritty-faced, my mother tearing slightly, I gathered from my father’s complaints, which arrived a little later like a residual cough); he’d try to retract it; I’d screech until perspiration came out on his brow; he'd stop; I’d whimper meanwhile, trying to pull away, but worse, a nurse—theretherethereing me and pinning my arms to my chest as if her job were at risk (what a job anyway, to get to watch the torture of a little boy who'd never harmed a soul, only ants and flies, who let caterpillars crawl across his wrist before he let them go, and now was being skinned, without the success of circumcision, within an inch of his it)—kept me reasonably in place, while the doctor took both thumbs and forefingers and put them around my stem, so small itself his thumbs were bumping into one another, and, pinching me, pushed down his somewhat flexed fists onto my balls while the skin slowly did what it was supposed to do—withdrew—my little head bruised, bleeding, and patchy (oh I felt sorry for it, for myself, my lot), the nurse shuddering sympathetically, but when I screamed again a good great scream the doctor shouted (aware a ruckus was starting in his waiting room): shut up you dirty little wid, and pushed his pinching fingers down into my lap, parting the skin with that last angry effort, then getting up with a hot sigh and saying, Cream it up and clean it, will you? before he left.
        My foreskin remained rolled up like a rug for the summer, and I went around in bowed legs with a little protective cup over the tip full of what looked like cold cream, my entire weenie wrapped with gauze except for the topmost point left open so I could leak. It was badly rigged and didn't work. Urine soaked back through the gauze and burned my scrapes, scalding my raw, oh so recently rolled-up skin. Then everybody had a tantrum because I wouldn’t pee at all, and wouldn’t drink or eat either.
        Which accounts for it, I suppose. I accepted the doctor’s judgment as if it were the reading of my fate. Without knowing exactly what that was, I’ve been a dirty little wid ever since.
It is, I can tell you, considerable. The Vales of Academe are acrawl with little worms who have managed to grow fangs and become vipers—asps, I think, one of the dinkier varieties. I know, because I came here in the character of someone harmless as a string, and now I can bite from one end and sting from the other. No mind pettier than mine. No mine more Kohler. Envy, jealousy, spite, malice: these are the feelings we dress in, our basic black, the essential scholarly regalia. Only the misfortunes of others give us pleasure. Schadenfreude is our Schadenersatz. Perhaps this isn’t true of Herschel, who has virtues some of us have never learned to spell, but generally the longest line of vain incompetents will lead you to the History Department, which regards itself as the beaten heart of the humanities, and therefore as the bitter object of all bad mouths, in any set of terms the poor relation, the hapless victim of every plot. Our teeth chatter with complaint like the castanets of gypsies. How we pose before the backdrop of our expertise, our years of training, our fine degrees; how we enjoy the small, ill-lit spaces of our power: office, classroom, corridor; how we play to our pupils, reenact our thought as if we’d never seen a stage, although there, where our chalk trods the boards, where our maps pull down like past performance posters, like jaded Shakespeareans, do we strut and plume our learned selves.
            THE CURSE OF COLLEAGUES
            Planmantee Particularly
             cultivated his mannerisms as if he were made of them; certainly there were none which escaped his notice in order to appear to be nervous tics or unconscious lapses of taste, and none over which he did not seem to have complete control, or to have chosen only after much study, rehearsal, and discreet exposure to practice, the way plays are opened out of town before allowing them to reach the big time, which, of course, was Planmantee himself—the Great White Gainsay.
             was a self-made man. I suppose somebody born in Fort Wayne wanting to be Viennese; somebody born in the wrong century, brought up a Hoosier, and educated in Ohio where he was keyed; somebody with a chin so bumpy it bent his mouth; somebody in that sort of fix would naturally try to repair the dam-
      age, grow a little beard to hide the lumps, wear knickers to turn back the clock, and carry a cane—well, a walking stick actually—for hikes in the Fischbacher hills; yes, somebody similarly handicapped might affect a haughty posture, buv books in expensive imported sets, manage to learn German during the war, but make sure its accents sounded Austrian yet aristocratic; and I suppose anybody so insecure about his background as to wish to blot it out, to live abroad when he could, with his Tyrolean wife who sewed him vests and knitted scarves for his neck, scarfs so fulsome, when wrapped twice around, they still reached his waist; anyone who feared he might be taken for an ignorant boor if his ancestry showed, an intellectual lightweight if the scales weren't skewed, 1 suppose such a person would find positivism a perfect club for the historical bully he would become, the scoffer’s condescension he wnuld perfect, the long nose he would imagine he wore and could look down—though his own was but a button—and the scornful tone, and the faintly raised right eye, the flicker of a smile which would appear when he delivered his opinion of your opinions; I suppose a forlorn creature like that would particularly wish to make himself up, and live as a fiction, a character in a book, always alert to be himself, and therefore cautious about his immediate response, as he checked through his wardrobe to see what moral clothing was appropriate for the occasion and what attitude properly went with what view, what feeling with what thought, consequently measuring his emotions meanly, as if enthusiasm were a mental illness, as if unfeigned delight were a disease, and every partiality a prejudice.
         managed to achieve splendid results by wearing glasses thick as bottle bottoms through which his vaguely enlarged eyes stared like those of some mcip-iently hostile aquarium fish at the passing of a finger's tip: you were of another species, his look said, and that is why you felt about Charlemagne the way you did, or believed in historical periods, or were about to defend Fate, or, stranger yet, incipience in fish or Geists in Zeits or primitive passions in jungle rhythms and wholesome reasons in wretched off-color rhymes.
         delighted in the discomfiture of those who mistakenly thought it wise to look into his eyes, or accidentally fell into their sphere, for this was where his voice stereophonically seemed to come from, immediately sliding the long imaginary length of his nose to impale you at some point, and to impose its will as though you had been tranquillized and could only stand where you stood and lower your cowed head, ashamed of assigning to an event an unquantified cause, apologetic because you had not recently read Ignatius of Antioch, or humiliated by the performance of your prize pupil, who, in the face of Planmantee's penetrating question, had answered like a puling schoolboy.
         liked to exercise his organs, and so for some of them he walked, trudging the mile and seven-eighths from his bachelor's digs to school each day in every
           weather (and counting the paces, too, his students thought, in order to assure himself once again that length was only a function of the method of its measurement—in this case, his size nine shoe); while for his eyes he read his own work once again, for his nose he snorted at superstition, for his teeth he ruminated, for his hair he combed out the deans who infested it (though this seemed a losing cause), for his tongue he lashed a putz flown in fresh for dis-putzing, and for his ears he listened (to recordings of his lectures, his students said, who claimed he hadn’t heard anything other than the sound of his own voice for years); whereas, for his handshake, he flexed his fingers, for his smile he pinched his cheeks, for his strength he carried a satchel of semester-old exams back and forth between home and office, for his larynx and lungs he sang arias loudly along with the broadcast of the Met’s matinees (such exercise is all the good an opera accomplishes, he always claimed), for his spleen he vented it, for his bile he grew bilious, to improve his state of mind he denigrated the condition of others, to improve his prospects he voted against promotions and tenure, and to get his rocks off, since his wife lived in separate quarters (in separate sixteenths, her friends over-Ioyally maintained), he whacked away into a test tube (his students pretended) and kept thimble-size tabs on the status of his potency.
              fancied his Phi Beta Kappa key, which he wore on a fat gold chain which was normally suspended between the traditional two pockets of the vests he also adopted as his academic uniform; and if, on account of the weather, he wore beneath his smoking coat a cardigan instead, the key was pinned to it with all the deliberate seriousness of diaper corners, so that the key was always adan-gle on the brow of his small turn, signifying early superiority of mind; while above, in a buttonhole, his Mensa insignia gleamed acidly like camel spit in everybody’s eye, testifying without remission to his continued cerebral dominance; for his was clearly the snobbery of the smart set, of those who play chess in their head and calculate to the penny the price of their groceries as they shop the market aisles, who have memorized a daunting list of obscure book titles, as well as authors of fragments in backward languages, nuns who wrote lesbian romances in their less religious moments, and conquistadors whose love lyrics were renowned throughout medieval Castile, in order to make the most knowing allusions to the dimmest pages of these distant works, and sauce their pallid and pedantic wit with bibliographical bon mots, footnoting even the idlest conversations with references to the undoubtedly instructional table talk of Pius V.
              specialized in disagreement, and that is why he was referred to as the Gain-sayer, more often than by any other epithet—the Ersatz Alpinist, for instance, or the Prince of Modus Ponens, or the Great IchBin—because he didn’t con-
      fine his objections merely to opinions, he was able to take exception to your posture, your point of view, your plan of study, your taste in sugary stewed tomatoes, your habit of uttering nonsense and embracing the absurd, furthermore he undertook these corrections gladly, of course, loudly, softly, shortly, at length, as the need was, in many synonymous styles of dissent and shades of exasperated or indulgent condescension, even to the point of pity sometimes, but always in your best interest, in order to strengthen your narrative, improve the quality of your judgments, the rigor of your arguments, the color and cloth of your shirt and tie, the sharpness of your discriminations, each of which was an element of life, academics, health or historiography that Planmantee—it turned out—was an expert on, and could consequently offer specialized and imprimatured, if not divine, assistance in
               redding up and straightening out sloppiness of mind—a noxious epidemic among academicians—due largely to the baleful influence of Hegel, Bergson, Toynbee, Marx, Buber, Sartre, Niebuhr, and other dead-again Christians, trying to pass for serious thinkers without having read Wittgenstein; and to the disgraceful absence, in every important area of humanistic study, of scientific procedures, concepts, and guiding ideals; inasmuch as we had reached a time when it was no longer rationally possible to entertain empirically unverifiable ideas as if they were bishops come to tea, and to accept every half-baked ideology that came along as if it were merely a quaint cultural practice it would be inconsiderate and impolite to denounce, and one which might possibly have value, enriching life or at least rendering it endurable, as if ideas were like the sugar people put in their stewed tomatoes; no, this was the century of physics and the triumph of symbolic logic in the realm of thought; philosophy was as fit and tough and ready for the bout as a boxer; now history had to take to the training table and run a few miles behind Bertrand Russell every day, sterilize its methods of measurement and tools of research, wipe its agenda clean of metaphysics and other bygone ghosts, and get going, make progress, establish foundations on which the subject might build, teach statistics and the philosophy of David Hume, and get with it, wake up to this new morning for the world, and measure, and distinguish, and deduce, and drive the mud-dleheads into the ocean, at the least keep them cooped up on the Continent, where all sorts of vices had been for centuries practiced, and for whom, on the whole (and since Wittgenstein had come to England, and the Vienna Circle had been dispersed by the Nazis to Urbana, Berkeley, Boston, and Ithaca), there was relatively little hope.
        broke certain words of scornful estimation into their phonetic constituents and then generally prolonged the initial syllable like a bridge of disdain thrown over a gulf of contempt, pronouncing nonnnnnnnnnn sense with a nasal drone
            of indefinite duration, and ridiculous with a strident reeeeeeeeee which die stopped like a traffic signal, only to proceed again, now personalized, as youu-uuuu louse, before it trailed away like a plume of steam to enter the ear of its victim; however, he also bit off certain phrases in the prissiest of tones, such as That will never do, which he conferred upon arguments, Blow it and dispose it, with which he greeted allegedly fresh ideas, or, for historical sources, the idiosyncratically skewed What account did you draw that hank of fog from?, delivered slowly with a heavy stress on what and that, while perversely pinching his most favored question as if it were a pimple to be popped: whatzatmin? so that for several weeks on being asked, I answered as if he were benevolently wondering, ique pasa?
               pleased me when he was administering a drubbing to some smart-ass pop-off who didn’t realize the company he was keeping, or when he was shaking all the loose change out of Culp's head or kicking the stuffing out of Governali, who would go overboard on every intellectual trip he took, which was okay, Planmantee said, he could drown himself in dim-wittedness if he liked, but shouldn’t jump every time in company with the ship’s brandy; and I didn't mind when Os sucked on his teeth because it meant you had slowed him down for a second; he was, in this holy moment, nonplussed; but 1 also approved when he went to the rescue of an issue in faculty meetings, because that always meant the issue was doomed (since 1 generally favored the defeat of all motions—repeal the past, inhibit the present, defeat the future, that was my policy), for Planmantee would first circle the subject at such a distance, and with such a pompous display of useless erudition, that the whole room would grow restive; then he would set up braces of distinctions like murdered birds, and limn them for us at such length we unwillingly grew to see them as composing a conceptual still life—dead X, dead Y, dead different from, dead equal to— whereupon eyes drooped and breathing deepened; next he trod across the history of the issue and how it had fared in all previous proceedings of our own department, reminding us how we had said AbbA at one time, BaBa at another, and had advanced reasons for both AbbA and BaBa too numerous to repeat, although a few might bear reiteration, namely W at length, X at width, Y in depth, and Z in brief; whereas what we were proposing to do now God alone would know—the vague ambiguity of the proposal was a scandal—and without wishing to put anybody’s back up, although the spinelessness of the suggestion in front of us was also noteworthy, nevertheless he felt obliged to say that Culp’s espousal of the motion was incomprehensible, Governali’s reprehensible, and Kohler’s prehensile (he liked to pretend 1 was some sort of simian, the ape of the intellect, he always said, not realizing it was a characterization 1 rather liked); and following these personal omnadversions, he
      would throw up his hands in the slowest of slow motions, bottle-eyes at the skies (or at the ceiling, as it actually was), then someone else, often Herschel, would call for the question, and the motion would easily pass (if we had figured out that Planmantee opposed it), or it would equally easily fail (if he had been in support, as was rare).
        liked not only to lard his observations with obscure references to obscure writers and their obscurer books, he also peppered his speech with rare words, learned from a list he had doubtless drawn up in high school and bent to whatever occasion was in question like a badly hammered nail; yes, bent is my claim, yes, badly hammered too, because I remember almost the first time he trotted one of his darling darkies out during a discussion we were having, since 1 remember ducking into my office immediately after and writing the word on my palm
                —it was ‘pulvillus,’ which 1 misspelled at first—the reason being that Planmantee had made such a point of its use, saying to me something like, “What a pulvillus proposition to hang upside down from its argument like that,” because when I looked this never-used little word up I found it was a noun, when he had employed it as an adjective, so I had the s.o.b. d.o.a. at the o.e.d. except I realized he could always claim a poet’s familiarity with ‘pulvillus (three Is two us) as if he had put its impressive obscurity to work in every other ode he wrote and could consequently adjectival it any time he wanted to;
                still, I knew, deep down, the pompous Fort Wayne fraud had purposely dropped it into his speech like a cherry atop a mound of mashed potatoes, where it looked grand but strikingly out of place; although incongruity never seemed to disturb Planmantee—why should it? he was a signal unsuitability himself in his baggy trou and tweedy vests, his feathered hats, his walking sticks—who simply went on pooping his personality on people, putting on more airs than Salome had veils, nagging me about the low-grade achievements of my students, bitching about the vulgar coarseness of Culp’s conversation (a complaint correct to many decibel points), sneering at Governali’s emotional volatility by saying he threw haboobs like kindergarten tantrums, and snubbing Herschel as if poor Herschel were a fish line running out too fast.
        sought to seize the morally high ground in every situation in which there was some high ground of that sort to be seized, and this habit of his particularly pissed me off because he was always trying to prove I was a fanny patter, prepared to give a good grade to any complaisant and buxom girlie in my recent history courses who was ready to acquire a bit of a past in the present and a flock of pecks from the prof, just because of the Betty Boop case, an isolated incident made of malicious allegations, and because they found me in my carpet slippers, what’s so indecent about that, for goodness’ sake? Boop ablush
            but otherwise intact, so that the dean dropped the complaint into what he called my vita trash, denying me the full investigation I threatened to request, with the excuse that the university didn’t need a scandal in the middle of its fund drive; well, what I wanted to know was why did the school need ten thousand seats added to its football stadium? because they expect to lose big time, Culp claimed, who would also add, on my behalf—the gerrymandered jackass—that he didn’t believe I marked my place in books with captured pubic hairs, even if the story was a common one on the campus (he should talk, when his every breath comes out in the shape of a cartoon balloon); and 1 also resented Planmantee’s pompous attitude about my field of expertise, and not simply because he thought nothing became history for a hundred years, when even then it was not yet ripe; but because he thought it wrong to be writing about yourself and passing it off as history (a canard, of course, I totally deny this and every other of his allegations); and because, he says, although not yet a completely composted Nazi, 1 am already a sour kraut, as if he knew what really went on in my mind—would that fry his pizzle; and, of course, because of whatzhisname s damn dissertation on D Annunzio and Italian political rhythms which Planmantee maintained couldn’t even pass for a mutant freak let alone a healthy normal piece of historical research; oh yes, how well I remember being called into his office like some misbehaving twerp to be lectured on professional standards and the wholesome wetness of the mainstream; poets weren’t a part of history anyway, much less their misleading metaphors, and there was enough slackness of that sort in the department already, people were writing monographs on kiltie bands and bagpiping societies, for god’s sake, and now this, which wasn’t even an area where a fact or two might be turned up like worms in the earth, so what would be next? worms you could no more impale upon a hook than a string of smoke; consequently he, Planmantee, couldn’t in all conscience countenance it, contrary as it was to every sacred scholarly practice known to the profession, and he wondered what I was going to do about it, because whatever it was, it had to at least succeed in getting this incompetent kid out of the program and into news reporting or some other similarly degenerate preschool activity, in any case out of history and the History Department where this student and his work (and I by implication) were an embarrassment, if not a source of scandal, since all of my pupils (he said “pupils” to put them back a few grades) were writing on dubious topics and doing sympathetic dances on Fascist graves; thus he ran on in that vein, gaining speed while I sat and took it to my shame, ablush like Betty Boop was when the department secretary walked in, believing me out of town, with the lights off and the door locked, but what did she really want? she didn’t say, never did through the whole hurrah, while I’m plenty hot under the collar like Boop too,
      beads of sweat between her breasts; my underarms were awash with rage as Planmantee went on smoothly, slickly, in an even tone, as though he were oiling a road, giving me the business until at last I rose, clearing my throat the way you push back a reluctant chair, trying to believe he was behaving the way he was because he’d been made a cuckold, eventually a wittol, by his wife, but failing to concentrate enough on that happy thought to alleviate my misery; and then saying, when my choked throat had cleared, “Planny, I suggest you stick all that smug self-regarding shit in your spleuchan now and spend it later," closing the door so softly on that last word that the door's click and "laters” concluding “-err" said in unison the same thing.
        practiced condescension, as I’ve said, bringing to nearly everything he uttered an unctuous pulpit tone, although softened to suit the ears of children to whom, it appears, he had always the misfortune albeit duty to address; of course, such a tone is a teacher’s tone and he was a teacher; nevertheless he would inform you of the weather, a phenomenon you had perhaps never heard about, with the fullness of detail and slowness of step of a third-grade reader, don’t you know; and he would teach you about the use of shoes, the placement of the equator, the ethnic origins of Christopher Columbus, with the same careful solemn explicitness (the tip of the shoelace is wrapped with plastic so the string won’t ravel and make threading it through the eyelets difficult, you see), waiting for you to nod so he can go on, or to smile, or emit an ah! of revelation, otherwise it will be necessary to repeat everything, going back as far as the purpose of the lace, perhaps, and certainly to the problem of threading a needle, an illustration he would use and use and use as if he couldn’t get the point through your eye; but if the listener grew impatient and leapt ahead or filled in the blanks before he got to them, or worse yet objected, or offered another answer, or suggested even a modest modification, or, out of enthusiasm for the happy course your common thought was taking, chime in, his tone would gradually alter, becoming more insistent, more offensive, and scorn would salt his former benignity as the pitch of his voice rose, though they would struggle—the vowels—to stay round, the consonants to remain, as appropriate, thick or long, and his patience to stay in place as though it were as important to his dignity as his underpants, never to be taken off or lost except perhaps in private, where I—to get even—imagine him screaming like a termagant at editorial passages in daily papers and smashing paper cups flat as insects in order to overcome fancied imbecilities or feared resistance.
        possessed an anal frame of mind, if you think of anality in the Freudian sense, because he was as retentive as a miser, forgetting nothing which had a number—not an address, age, date, phone, or account—because for Planmantee things did not become real until they had been understood as quanti-
            ties, and until, ideally, each quantity had received its rightful name, for the name, in this case, would contain the character of the thing to precisely the same degree as the thing itself (if the name had been fully and properly appointed and applied, that is to say); but when I would chide him for this, suggesting he was a closet Pythagorean, a Platonist in some cute empirical getup—all clothes no emperor—as Frege, Wittgenstein, and Russell were, he would smile and snort and cite statistics—no, my dear Kohler, Pythagorean numbers are all wrongly arrived at, when they are calculated as the descriptions of things, 1 am speaking of a different sort of database, made of itsy-bit-sies—and so he was, since history for him was never to be found in this event or that, but in swatches and samples and grand amounts, and the lines he drew and called History were every one of them medians, summaries, averages, on-the-wholes, inasmuch as human affairs fell, for him, under the same laws as rust, rot, mold, or mildew did, and proceeded slowly, gradually, by means of many almost imperceptible modules, each indifferently important by themselves—those straws, considered singly, that the camel bore—but as unstoppable as lava when hot, amassed, and moving; so the dramas which got all the press, as well as the benighted attention of most historians, were like the camel’s back breaking, all consequence and no cause—although single causes were an anathema, in fact ‘cause’ was a term he had discarded in favor of ‘community’ and ‘conjunction’ and ’correlation’ and—yes—‘mob,’ he would admit that, since history had no Geist to goose it on, no target for which it strung its bow, no real great moments, turning points, or apogees, but only its slow continuous implacable flow in no discernible direction to realize no appreciable value or even fatal flaw.
               hated Hey-digger, as he broke up and mispronounced the name, and as he would have gladly broken up the man himself, I think, for Planmantee was a true liberal for all his love of number and order and quantification; or, 1 should say, particularly because of this prejudice he loved democracy with a passion I would have thought peculiar to the Sophists, who preferred to deal with masses because they were swayed more easily than individuals, and where each dolt had their doltish vote in a readily picked pocket and had conveniently grown a pair of ears easily bent by bias; however, I would have been wrong in my emphasis, Planmantee preferring the multitude because each man did count for one and only one when collecting the sample, and furthermore, because in history there were no heroes, only almost anonymous elements—the itsy-bitsies—except that his liberalism utterly lacked the liberal’s love affair with the human person, since each of us was equally unimportant, a part of the main, all right, but an infinitesimal part—one bit of dust in a dust storm—and because he didn’t for a moment believe in improvement, progress, or realized
      goals—perhaps if your goal was the grocery store, but not in the totality of things—oops, a word, 'totality,' I should not have used, since for Planmantee reification was almost the chief intellectual vice, not only because it tended to multiply entities beyond necessity, but because it created them in the first place, populating the mind with fictions (a habit I personally have always found appealing) which then took over history, strutting and fretting their period” upon the stage, rising, falling, acting, achieving, failing, fading, degenerating, on and on, like, he would say, leftovers from a political banquet, ultimately to spoil on abandoned trays, in sinks of dishes, pails of slop, until they returned to the realm of legitimate data again, their petty totality deposed and its elements dispersed the way pepper flies over steak—yet in the middle of this liberality, like the maraschino cherry on the mound of mashed potatoes, sat Planmantee on his throne of superiority, a superiority earned, however (he would certainly argue), through the diligence of his demystification of human affairs, a demystification which included himself, yet one which granted him, as it had granted the same to Socrates, the nobility of knowing he was nothing—a nothing among other nothings—and that there was really nothing before or after us . . . nothing; yet this was not a nothing which might claim to have a capital, not a romantic or royal or existential Nothing worth a waltz with Being around a bookstore, but a nuthin nothing, in no way to be singled out or preferred, so if you didn't know this, that reality was muddled mass in motion, there was something seriously the matter with your mind—this was the twentieth century wasn’t it? the century of Einstein, Wittgenstein, and Gertrude Stein, therefore there was no excuse for febrile dreams, the universe had to grow up and admit its triviality; or, as Culp, his always on-a-roll rival, would say: each man who can count, counts, and those who can’t count are noaccounts whom those who can count will still count, but call disparaging names while numbering their noses,
               carefully redding up their messes, straightening their ties from family to railroad, and generally regulating life so that its meaninglessness will be obvious; that is to say, removing, putting away like outgrown clothes, the cultural disguises which transform truth into something which can be pleasantly believed; forbidding sports, politics, gambling, advertising, and religion, in fact the worshiping of idols of any kind: wood, marble, or matinee; banning the celebration of historical outrages as well as the habit of remembering the Maine; preventing cliches which will nevertheless be stricken from the language the moment they reach thoughtless overuse; advancing the study and measurement of moods; urging the institution of Memorial Mondays during whose lunch hours the formulas of famous scientists will be recited; endeavoring to achieve the abolition of intemperance, intolerance, and indigence by having
           citizens fuss endlessly over petty details, forgive all that’s foreign as they ought to be forbearant of other transgressions, and fast till their flesh falls off; encouraging the study of logic and the practice of thinking in numbered sentences; permitting grudges to be held only so long as a bitten tongue takes to heal (except in the case of those against Governali, Culp, or Kohler); having ceremonies to disgrace previously admired universal; expunging anecdotes from serious conversation, personalities from arguments, second thoughts from love affairs, and popcorn from cinemas; to cite only some of the changes which an enlightened community of nominalists might reasonably consider; including, 1 should imagine, the canceling of null classes, the closure of empty bank accounts, the enlargement of juries, the rearrangement of the calendar to eliminate millennia, centuries, and decades, along with other accidentally significant divisions which might lead the unenlightened to dignify otherwise unimportant hunks of Time; the systematic and proper naming of heretofore neglected quantities: the parking places in public lots, the peaks on meringues, the shapes of chocolate candies, the miseries of middle-class life, of which Planmantee had certainly had his share, inasmuch as his kids had taken up basketball and the clergy—one daughter was a preacherette in a retirement town in Arizona—while his wife (who’d been a woman much longer than he’d been a man) had left him to take up caring for endangered species and for the society of an athletic club composed of young men with weight-lifting proficiencies—delicious disinflations, I thought; yet 1 couldn’t help feeling sorry for him sometimes, just as 1 often had to admire his utopian follies, for he really did believe that everybody should make a particular person of themselves; and he had done that, surely, even if 1 didn’t especially admire the result; moreover his insufferable lordly tone was as necessary to keeping up his spirit as a belt to a pair of pants, especially since that spirit was weighed down with both personal and professional distress: a wife ten years his senior who was seeing men distinguished for their muscular measurements, a lifelong commitment to a positivist point of view concerning history now going out of fashion faster than felt hats, and a set of colleagues who simply had no class, were uncongenial company, quarreled constantly, while disliking
             Planmantee Particularly
              wanted to have this meeting of the chairman’s advisory committee. I did not see what advice the chairman could need or would wish to receive at the moment since he was away on the East Coast misinforming Yale about the origins
       of the Civil War. Of course, everybody had his own theory about that. Herschel honey naturally thought the war had been fought to free the slaves. Planman-tee’s explanation was particularly economic: agrarian South versus industrial North. Governali, with predictable elan, was convinced that the conflict was between a Romanticist’s past and a Realist’s future. It opened the door on the Twentieth Century. Which then blew shut during Vietnam. And I wanted to know what the meeting was about.
         Governali claimed that the New Century had really begun at the logs of Bloody Angle, when not only had trench warfare been initiated, but attacks of attrition were employed on a heretofore unheard-of scale. Grant was a ghoul. He flung his men at the Rebel positions like rice at a wedding. Lee was the gracious gentleman of the old school. And so forth. What could our chair have to say to Yale that Yale hadn’t heard? Why had this meeting been so surreptitiously called?
         And 1 should want to say, if I can keep all the pieces of my person on the pie plate, that from the material point of view Planmantee is right about the war, as he usually is, but only if you are viewing the catastrophe from ground zero, and Herschel’s moral tone is quite correct, as well, but it cannot be sounded alone without appearing to be absurd, like a lark among geese; while Gover-nali’s picture of the conflict as a cultural clash is indeed profound, yielding insights all around like windows in a church, except that it cannot sustain itself without the hot air of the others, as Culp would surely snicker.
                        When they fought the War Between the States, each thought their cause was such great shakes.
                        It was juleps and grits against silver and ships.
                        It was men of the mills against men of the hills.
                        “You all” shot “yup,” and Yankee killed Reb.
                        To save the union, the union was bled,
                        as docs always do, though the patient grew pale,
                        and hasn’t recovered by the end of this tale.
         At first you thought Culp thought the Civil War was fought to Preserve the Union, which more than begged the question of its cause: it pleaded it, it groveled; but you eventually, and circuitously, learned he believed the war was waged to cement dis union, to prolong division. We needed a wound or we would have had no top or bottom. Now North and South can be North and South forever. Hurrah boys, hurrah.
                 Here comes the Plant, knickers to his nose, a smug moral look to him as if he’d eaten oatmeal for breakfast. He looks behind him out the open door as if he's already ready to shut it. God, this isn’t going to be a tete-a-tete,
             I hope. He has put his walking stick on the seminar table. He thinks it's a rifle. This will be war. He has three books with him, all by, I crane a bit as he turns his back to toss his Tyrolean hunting hat over a hook, Jesus, 1 knew it, the bastard, all by D’Annunzio. He greets me rather formally: good morning, William. Another nasty sign. Plan, I grunt in reply, Os. He will be polite, punctilious, in the beginning, until he sees me bleed. Then his mouth will open wide.
                       Let’s concentrate on the top of the table, which is made of dirty yellow oak covered, however, with a thick sheet of glass, which has a tendency to magnify the grain of the wood beneath it in strange ways. Alternatively, 1 think of its coarse expanse as a kind of moon map, full of crater hatches, and then, in another mood, as a large beast’s rutted dermis, or, more placidly, as the sandy bottom of a small lake. The shadow of Planmantee’s stick runs a great way. When he rolls it off with one finger as though he were Fred Astaire, its shadow undulates like a slowly swimming snake. On the pond, near the newly risen isle of books, an ashtray floats, then nearby my paper coffee cup. It is a shallow sea, this surface, which permits its bottom to pretend to be its top.
                       All would be well with these images—they would serve—if it were not for the signs which have been carved here and there in the wood, or worn by the repeated back-and-forth push of a pencil into a dark nervous groove which says &, or forms an idly empty □, or makes a quick slash /, or completes an initial, RLS scars whose depth and unevenness account for the placement of the glass, leading to the vagaries of its stiff reflections, and eventuating in the confusion among the metaphors one makes up to master such a problematic object.
               The seminar room is stiflingly small, with narrow high windows along one wall, some nailed-in benches looking cheaply homemade, as if built for basement recreations, and then, shoved uncomfortably beneath the table, a motley collection of uncomfortable oak chairs with backs as straight and unforgiving as our characters will be at meetings like the one that’s up-and-coming, and finally, the principal occupant, Mission Oak’s bulky table, an animal intent on swallowing the space my arm is moving through as 1 reluctantly return Gover-nali’s wave—he passes the door—damn, I’ve come too early, and now I’m condemned to sit with Planmantee who is settling himself ponderously at the head of the table, as, I suppose, the organizer of this meeting should, chair of the chairman’s advisory committee and the only man here with hair growing out of his ears. Although I find this table, like Martha’s purchases, an oversize menace, I try to occupy my mind with something unapprehensive such as—it oddly occurs to me—solving a definition in a crossword. Meanwhile the shark’s smile widens, 1 must be bleeding already it isn’t a smile, it is a grimace, goodness, what next? I’m happy you’ve decided to be prompt, he says, and I wonder, what? decided? I simply was, was on time, ah, he’s commenting sardonically
      on my nervously early arrival, knew it, 1 wish Governali would get his Eyetie ass in here, there's safety in numbers, Plan has begun turning the stack of books so their fine spines face me, II trionfo della morte, do tell, in Italian, too, as if he knew the language, does he? Governali would of course be fluent, for you have to speak—to the heavenly hosts—in the tongue of the painters who have painted God best and most, he twits me, claiming I only know how to curse in Operatic and love in Belles Lettres, but I claim to cook in Cuoco and kiss in Nipponese. We’ll see, 1 say to Herschel, we'll see how he fares when
            Governali Goes to Heaven
         Governali is a wop. You wouldn’t immediately think so. He is short, but slight, and his face is narrow as a ferret’s. His hair is long, black, and straight, to be sure, and looks a little greasy; however, he doesn’t have fat hands or wear jewelry; his eyes aren’t pinched inside swollen rings, and no cheap-chained crucifix dirties his neck. Without a belly and bursting buttons, or wet lips wrapping a shit-eating grin, without hair matting his body and growing from his nose, without a thick neck and one obnoxiously loud and waddling mama, without, in short, the ethnic necessities, how could he be a wop?
         Easy. His gestures are as expansive as his theories. He talks faster than a steno types. He dissolves in tears, or claws at his hair in frustration or displeasure, his thoughts dart, but while they do—in transit, so to speak, from one ideational peak point to another—he purses his lips and whistles his wind in, as if he were sucking up a strand of oily pasta, or kissing hot soup. Again, since he never refers to his family in Napoli or his relatives in New York, his Fiat car or his daughter named Lire, and keeps his wife on a long loose leash, you might question the designation, and wonder if it really fits.
         To a T. The T is for the T in Tommaso, for that is the name he still goes by, although his family emigrated two generations back and from a town no one seems to remember. Still, anybody called Tommaso Governali has got to be a wop. And a follower of Gentile. And Benedetto Croce. Though in name only. True, he doesn’t celebrate the birthdays of the saints or wear a lot of ethnic; he doesn’t fly the Eyetie flag or march in parades, or eat bread sogged in olive droppings, as far as I know. Or carry a spear for the local light opera.
         His accent is substandard suburban, Jersey Shorish, and ugly in every way, but not overly voweled and wavy; he does not speak, to sum the situation, any more miserably than most; nevertheless, what a wop!—mamma mia and more
             so—what a wop! He doesn’t entertain ideas, he sings arias. Everything he believes in is broad of hip, loud of tongue, sentimental in expression, personal as a vendetta. He needs to have his opinions embraced, even if he isn’t given to hugging. You can crush him with a fervent maledizione. And he will respond with the academic equivalent of “calling you out.” He believes in cabals and conspiracies. He treasures oddballs and collects them like stamps. For him, history has acts; whole nations die like prima donnas, or clasp hands with their allies and swear vengeance. The greeds of the village he understands, but not the larger-than-life, the actually inhuman, appetites of cartels and corporations. He is an innocent when it comes to economics. Statistical data drive him dotty. History is hysteria and histrionics. There is a pit, a proscenium, and a curtain—whatever the audience can see—but there is nothing going on behind the scenes: courtship and conspiracy take the form of duets. There is strutting. There is fretting. There is certainly singing. There is swooning. There is passion, heartbreak, and death. Moreover, in all he says, in all he writes, in all he attempts to demonstrate, there is the implicit assumption that we shall all one day meet at center stage to take a bow.
                T.G. likes to insert himself in people’s lives. He is a perpetual interrogator. An empathizer. He makes you suffer from his bartender’s ear. You are enveloped by a sentimental concern whose misty fog is like one of those wet-air machines ... a humidifier. Yes, Governali humidifies whatever of your life you have carelessly shown him. Stamps, in his presence, stick together. It is not, simply, that he gushes, but he “comes over one” like a mood or a discovery, the onset of a sore throat. He can’t stand still, so he circles you, spreading conceptions like a viral infection. He would like to hear what your wife had to say about genital enjoyment; he would be delighted to know what you customarily serve on Christmas Eve, if you ever gave a tip to the postman, if the care of cars is obnoxious to you, if you cut your kids’ hair, if you ever considered cheating at Parcheesi.
                You may have forgotten last winter’s flu, but he hasn’t. And is your cough improved? has your cat recovered from its diarrhea? When, in the month, do most of your bills come due? Did you like those cherry-flavored cough drops he recommended? Have any of his students complained to you about his classes? How long have you neglected to believe in God? Of course he knows that God has run away into the Shandy Westerness, but the love of God is a sublime force in history. Sublime. Sublime. But the sublimity of love does not prevent him from treating history no different from a street squabble; it is composed of ordinary human events like a cuckold killing his rival; it is acts of revenge or charity, cruelty or kindness. Whew. What a wop. He talks too loud in restaurants. He loves stereotypical stories, those which have what are called “plots.”
      He enjoys conflicts between good and evil. There are heroines, of course, and the villains who tie them to the tracks. There are heroes who at least always try to arrive in the nick of time. Life is a harmless tragedy which has moments of comic relief. Can you imagine? What a wop.
         Planmantee, of course, who hates subjectivity, and who considers it in the same way as he would a serious, if not malignant, illness, cannot abide Gover-nali even more than he cannot abide me; how is it possible, he always begins, how is it possible in this day and age (his hands rise in mock astonishment); in this day and age, how is it still possible to think of History in terms so shallow they won’t wet the paper in the pan when the dog widdles? how is it possible at this hour of the world to watch the past as you would a Bette Davis movie: chockablock with sentiments, characters, plots, subplots, benevolences, crying jags, ennoblements and crimes? It is not possible. It is imm possible. Okay, I say (appearing to agree in such a way 1 disagree politely), are you prepared to watch Tommaso swallow fire, stand on his head on the high wire, do a triple somersault wearing only a hair net? I won’t watch, Planmantee exclaims, I don’t want to catch his case of enthus miasma ism.
         Rome was built with slaves and money, Planmantee says; Rome wasn’t built with love. It was built with lots of pain and suffering, Governali says, his voice conveying an appropriate sadness. No, damn it, it was done with stones, Planmantee shouts. Lots of stones, cut from quarries, dragged on sledges, hauled in place with ropes. The sweat and the suffering are simply side effects. Epi ph.ee nom me nah. Well then, human life is only sea foam, Governali says, his voice conveying an appropriate sadness. However—his features brighten—you are—as you are usually—helplessly wrong: history is the story of people who find themselves either in potato patches or in sour pickles. Governali makes all of his pronouncements with daunting confidence. Ach! we all cry: what a dumb Tommaso!
         A piece of soft fruit from the medlar tree. That’s what I told him he was. Well, T.G. was pleased. He approved of the author my joke invoked. He takes you by the arm. He is about to speak importantly. He is the sort who takes you by the arm when he intends to say something significant. You should be warned, by this, to slip a sleeve and flee. Hegel is too regimental, he says with slow insistence. For emphasis, T.G. prolongs his too’s. A man with the right idea: ebb and flow, act and counteract, misdeed and counterdeed; but he doesn’t invest his scheme with a sufficiently ample humanity. (By ‘ample humanity’ he means fat slob, Planmantee inserts.) Governali releases one arm to nab another. And he, Hegel, human in his off hours, can see how quantities can change their characters when increased beyond a certain point (when ballooned), or shrunk sufficiently into insufficiency (when pruned); on the other hand, our
             metaphysician does not choose to see that it is not the quantity of quantity, but the quantity of quality which counts, and which achieves the change.
               What spoils an oversalted soup: the salt or the salty taste?
               What are you talking about, Tommaso? Tommaso circles me even while we walk like profs in the quad, looping back and forth like a happy dog. He is probably wondering whether I wear my wallet in a jacket or down a trouser pocket. I am talking about your life, Willi, how annoyances add up, because irritations don’t mount the way amounts do, do they? they slide inside of one another like shuffled cards; they change their values when they find themselves in a hand with the damn club trey or the diamond queen (1 don’t play cards, I say); irritations divide like elemental organisms, don’t you find? so that a person is irritated by his own irritation (he interrupts himself to congratulate his own remarks, as if they had won a beauty contest); nor do irritations disappear like harmless little rashes, but fade like an athletic fungus does to hide between the toes, ready to rise and greet every new arrival, to reflame when the foot sweats; because it’s true, don’t you find? that we seek out and repeat irritating circumstances (I agree, what can I do? I see him every day); we put on the old tennis shoes again; then those former irritations add their itch and sting and soreness to the present one; so that when the next annoyance comes to call, more pure dander will have been pent up to greet it than even its owner can imagine, or ordinary measures count (I agree again, what can I do? for today he is wearing a tie which depicts the phallic length of a dead fish: yes, indeed, dear Tommaso, you are cause enough for killing); consequently any small slight—the little gesture with its thoughtless surcharge, which would normally require only good manners to manage, now calls for considerable self-control, and every demand put on self-control increases the very pressure it hopes to contain (Tommaso, 1 try to say, with the forewarning laugh appropriate to such insults, it is not necessary to supply your hypothesis with so much proof in person; but he chooses, as usual, to ignore chaff, especially when approaching a conclusion whose point has been long lost); your irritation isn’t a cloud, a shower now; it is a climate.
               1 place my hands squarely in front of his mouth. This works. He grins behind the hands. Bows only to duck beneath them. Evades me without manifesting any irritation. Leaving me with mine. Tommaso is the nemesis of Planmantee. He likes to break bills, reduce them to change, do in amounts, let sums be consumed by their constituents. All in order to inflame the eye of our positivist. Who is a devotee of ultimate data. Who believes history is made of small moments like seeds. If a spoken sentence can be reduced to its clauses, phrases, words, and pauses, and if words are made of syllables, then there surely will be a unit of significant sound—a phoneme—which cannot be made
      smaller without reducing the sentence to meaningless noise; and if this can be done with molecules and elements, atoms and electrons, fruitcake and money, then it can also be done with experience (there is, of course, the classic example of Hume’s "impressions”), as well as with History and its ultimate events.
         Governali hoots. What do you expect from a wop? A hoot He loves the seed-pod theory because he thinks it is so silly. He says, okay, a dollar is one hundred pennies. But not if it is in the form of one hundred pennies. (He waits for our eyebrows to rise.) Then the lot only has the value of an unwanted heap, weighing heavily in your hand, a clutch too burdensome to be plopped in your pocket. If you can get a grip on this example, Plan, you won’t merely rid yourself of a ridiculous idea, you will suddenly understand the essence of the subject you’ve been trying to teach for thirty years.
         Planmantee exhibits considerable patience in these circumstances; however, it is only because he is confident of his powers of rebuttal; hence he smiles a smile only the supremely superior know, a smile so smug and self-satisfied it resembles a gold-foiled Belgian chocolate. Governali is too busy circling to receive it.
         Let’s say you’ve got this jar full of dimes. What good is it to you? You must swag the jar in a paper bag and lug the bagged jar to the bank where some noisy machine will embarrass you by counting it out loud, clitter by clitter, and then, in exchange for the dimes which have been tarnishing for so long beneath their mayonizing glass, you will receive a little actual folding money. In short, you have transformed the annoying pile into a single sum, a new and freshly integrated whole: the silver certiff. Comprendo? Plan . . . ? Os?
         The smile on the Manatee’s face looks forced, as if he had been grinning too long at a camera, but his confidence, I know, is unimpaired. Since he put his personality in place thirty or forty years ago, nothing has been permitted to impair it.
         . . . you can say—with your customary scornful tone—that of course the dollar bill and the many pennies are equal (even Governali, like Culp, knows how to make the equals sign); however, if I pitch my pennies into a hundred Salvation Army kettles—clink—clink—clink—eh?—1 have effectively destroyed that bucket of cents you call a bill, and you’ve received nothing for your money but the scornful glances of a hundred tired Santas; but if I give my hundred to a hundred kids, each of whom buys a piece of penny candy, then the pleasure created is immense. Found money, for instance, is far more monetary—
         I place my hands squarely in front of his mouth. So I can’t see his teeth. The pennies drop into the kettles, my friend, I say, but they all reunite at the end of the day to make dollars again. Okay, Tommaso admits, wrong example, but you see what I mean. Piffle, Plan says, stabbing his walking stick into the soft earth
           as if he were about to draw a map, you are illicitly enlarging the meaning of money. The tip inscribes a box which it divides with a shaky line. The universe has been bifurcated. To the left of the divisor, all money and meaning and numerals lurk, while to the right—the cane punches at the bogs and fens of indistinction which endanger that region—is the ghetto where subjectivities drift—ghostlike and indefinite. Planmantee is seriously peeved now because I played his first card for him. He loves the immediate riposte, for instance, when Governali asked what oversalted the soup, the salt or the salty taste, Planmantee swiftly replied that it depended on the state of the slurper's blood pressure.
              The buying power of the penny changes, I mischievously continue (just think of what happened to the German mark when it took a million to buy a stamp), but the penny remains a hundredth part—ninety-five of them don’t suddenly top off as a dollar. The Manatee looks beached. 1 have stolen his water. How about Indian heads, T.G. asks, in relentless pursuit of his quarry.
              Governali is the only one of us who is referred to by his initials. Plan is Plan or Os or the Manatee, Culp is called Culp, Herschel is Hershey, I’m usually Willi. T.G. stands for “tough going.’’
              The sound of his strange name naturally encouraged us to loan Planmantee the wet mammal’s odd nomination, but it also fit him a bit because the creature has a heavily rounded rear, and is famous, 1 think, for its thick skin, its rarity, and for its dubiously unreal appearance.
              I've decided to call them Eames, Planmantee says. Now it is another day, another conversation. We are standing in front of our mailboxes and have been surreptitiously eyeing one another’s envelopes. What? call what, what? The ultimate elements of history, the hairs which make up the tale. The smallest units of any objective narrative. Culp immediately suggests mythettes. How about narrashards? Telltatters? no, that’s decay, not construction. Plotdots? Pointillies? Eames as in taxemes, Plan says. Morphemes. Sememes. Episte-memes. I prefer anecdots to plotdots, T.G. tells Culp. Anecdots is good, Culp agrees; but a wag is principally what a tail does; it is its ultimate unit of action; so why not call them wags? How about naming them allohists, Hershey suggests, as usual taking our circus seriously.
              Herschel is himself a kind of common denominator for every sort of part, piece, element, aspect, and fraction. He is as indivisible as mist, inseparable as egg white.
              Governali named his oldest daughter Lire, I suppose, after the amounts of money it cost him to bring her into being. His wife was quite ill during her entire term, vomiting morning, noon, and night, before, after, and during meals, while awake but more dangerously during sleep. She wore a big bib and looked so blue-cheeked that the one time I saw her she appeared to be unshaved. Her
      eyes sank in their sockets, darkly rimmed, yet they seemed huge, about to pop from their settings. It was the Governalis' first kid, but his wife was as huge as
      the brooder she inevitably became—married to T.G.—such a wop! and I
      don’t think she ever got larger than she did for her first one. She was in and out of the clinic like a cuckoo: the clinic did tests; the clinic dithered, the clinic prescribed; the clinic charged plenty for each one of its mistakes, and faculty weren't well covered with fancy health plans then. Culp said the baby’s middle name might be Lire, but her first one had to be Lotsa.
        There were rumors, though, that the kid wasn’t really Tommaso’s. His wife—why can’t 1 remember her name?—carried on at parties and had big tits inevitably wouldnt a wops wife?—though not so massive as my Martha’s became—however, these twin seducers were not enough evidence, large as they were, and grandly displayed, to convict of infidelity, or even support suspicion. The rumor was that she was bedding down with a cladautoi-cous kid in organic chemistry—unlikely—how would she meet him?—so had her belly soon swollen with a test tube baby, and was consequently sick with remorse and rejection. Governali simply looked concerned, and stayed away from the office a good deal during her pregnancy. Then Lire came a bit ahead of schedule, artificially, through a cesarean slit (at the same time adding authenticity to the theory of the child's illegitimacy), so the clinic’s cash register rang with the regularity of a morning alarm, getting T.G. up every day, dull and early, to teach both sessions of summer school, prop his little Fiat up on blocks, and ride a bike to campus.
        Governali spent the fifties as a part of the chorus, but when that silly book of his—Character Crucified on the Cross of the Historical Chronicle—came out, and received raves from the reactionaries who wanted history turned back into biography, and biography backed into moralized little Aesopian fables of fate, fortune, and foolishness, edifying as all git out, uplifting as a bra, rosy as the nipples in it; when the Times interviewed him, and public radio did a report; when his promotion came through without a hitch (we didn't dare vote against it, revealing the envy we felt, the disappointment with our own vacant and weedy lot); and when he got a goddamn Guggenheim to boot, and was elected to the Faculty Senate; then our small Italian friend grew a large voice, took hold of our sleeves without our leave, circled us as if we were his prey, and lectured us concerning our coldness, our indifference, our pseudoscientific pretensions, my fascism, Herschel's humility, Culp’s crassness, and particularly on the Manatee’s pooh-poohing proclivities—in any pronouncement, Tommaso said, Planmantee’s purpose was to put plenty of p’s and h’s in it in order to make it seem blown out of his mouth like a bubble of spit—then we were ready to feel the same Schadenfreude at his downfall as an aristocrat might at the bank-
            ruptcy of a nouveau riche; we even loved it a little when he went to extremes, hoping the tide of his success would turn to toss him back on the beach, or that his braggadocio would receive Mussolini’s fate, and the little worm would become a little worm again, upon whose boneless back we would return those boots we felt we had received from him.
              Even the profession caved in beneath the weight of Governali’s popularity, and despite itself extended him at least one palm of an applauding hand. By publishing Nuremberg Notes 1 had achieved a certain dubious notoriety, but the notoriety had dried, as though left out in a warm wind, to leave a residue of scorn behind. Herschel was a mole who worked in secret. I had resolved, in my own odd way, to emulate him. Culp, of course, was still composing his limer-ickal history of the human race:
                                   Dido said to Aeneas,
                             Surely you’re not going to leave us? you wouldn’t flee home
                             just to found Rome, which will fall anyway, so you might as well stay to enjoy all my sweet panaceas...
           is one which 1 unfortunately remember; while Planmantee placed his tidy quantitative studies in journals so small his text had to be tabular. So for years we remained in the wash of Governali’s wake, and as the squalid sixties neared their mournful shore, we could see nothing but more success for him. He produced like a salmon who’d had an easy journey upstream. No, his misery was to take another form.
             When Lire was about fifteen, she began to hang around the campus, Coking it up in the coffee shop, trying to get into the football games without a student card, and hitching rides on the rump ends of motorcycles and the backs of pickup trucks. Not many students drive motorcycles or pickup trucks, and those who do are far from the scholarly kind. When she wrote the letters which made her presence generally known, she used university stationery—the kind you can buy at the bookstore, embossed with school emblems to the point of embarrassment—in order to appear to be a student and older than she was. Apparently Lire eventually contrived a false ID and began to frequent bars and other dubious student crash sites. She certainly seemed mature enough, having inherited her mother's prominences. According to Culp, the students’ description of her was “ajar between two jugs.” Culp, however, makes things up.
        Although her absences got her in trouble at her high school, they were never prolonged or flagrant enough to get her thrown out. No one knew then of the warmly rewarded boys who did much of her work, and in this, as in other ways, repeatedly covered for her. We supposed that, being around college kids as much as she was, Lire eventually heard the rumors about her mother, and the gleefully metered gossip concerning the magical chemistry of love. In this notably sleazy way, Lire learned that she was the test tube baby celebrated in campus song and story:
                     Lola was just a learner at the Bunsen burner ... just a nervous seeker among pipette and beaker...
      Lola—that's right—that’s her name. Or is it Lila. Lila or Lola—both close. 1 haven’t seen her since . . . forever. She became a recluse. Never comes to department parties—wise—never shops at the neighborhood markets, never entertains to our knowledge, never pals around, no longer flouts her mounts or flirts her skirts, though, 1 suppose, she isn’t quite so appetizing now as she— younger—fresher—juicier—was.
        It is Herschel's hypothesis that Lire found out about her illegitimacy, and her mother's alleged experimentations, before she began to behave in scarlet ways. “Scarlet ways” is his phrase. It is Herschel’s hypothesis that her “running around" was a consequence, not a cause. He thinks this takes Lire off the hook. Of course, Herschel would unhook even artificial bait, if he were given the chance—anything but a bra, Culp claims. The world merely makes me sick, but Herschel hurts for it. That’s because he is always on the end of someone’s line. His mouth is a cicatrix of collected scars.
        So Lire found out. One way or another. And began—or continued—to cut up. It wasn’t long before she was marching around carrying placards and wearing dirty hair. Her voice was rough from rallies and pot smoke. Sit-ins gave her an opportunity to lay her body down for something besides sex. The campus flics arrested her when red-inspired SDS gangs burned down the ROTC building. They nabbed her again when the clowns pup-tented on our Founder's Grave. They took her in another time when the cops cleared a lot of student ruck out of the dean of men’s office. Well, what to do with the little vixen? Lire was underage, not even a student, the daughter of a well-known prof, and pretty cute. Her involvement with the fire was considered remote and dubious; the other times she was only guilty of parking her fanny in forbidden places—which she apparently did a good deal of the time. Govemali, of course, was being torn to pieces.
              Among us, the majority view was that Lire was punishing her mother by behaving as she believed her mother had. It was Herschel’s opinion—in the minority of one, again—that Lire was punishing her father for not behaving in the traditional Italian macho-man manner and serving the chemkid’s balls to her ma as chicken skin. These thoughts, of course, I have just expressed in Culp’s characteristically crude fashion. Herschel would never be so disrespectful. But Herschel is a klutz.
              Since our dear dumb Tommaso had almost certainly never heard the gossip, and almost certainly never suspected his wife of any more infidelity than an upwardly immobile bosom might incline her to, and therefore could not find a reasonable reason for his daughter’s sudden departure from the script, he was a helpless Christian to Lire’s lion. Bit by bit, rally on rally, march after march, arrest upon arrest, Governali’s sanity was being pulled apart like wet paper. Contrary to his own well-developed attitude to history, he tried to add up his daughter's possible causes for complaint as if he were Planmantee keeping a tally. I will give him credit: never once did he suppose Lire was actually acting out of outrage for Vietnam, from anger at America’s treatment of its nigs, in disgust at the oinking of the pigs, or the puritanical posture of the country’s Whigs.
              Principled action is so rare as, perhaps, never to occur. Sophomoric as the peaceniks' ideals are, innocent asininity nonetheless split its baggy trousers laughing when Lire began shaping her mouth to fit rebellion’s formulas, forking her tongue, too, in order to give utterance to what, in her case, were plainly multiple hypocrisies, since she certainly did not belong to the student body, having falsified her presence, any more than the alleged nobility of the students' beliefs belonged to anybody: it was an idealism which attached itself to the movement’s leaders like a leech, ready to relinquish its hold at nothing more menacing than the still warm touch of a burnt match. 1 tell the Manatee that these kids don’t want to interrupt their careers or endanger their lives, that’s all; they don’t want to be shot at. If they would simply fess up, I might at least admire them for their honesty in addition to applauding a cowardice altogether opportune. But Planmantee suffers from liberalism the way the impoverished do from parasites. He supports the callow self-serving causes of these flowerpot-heads: the shouting, the marching, the taunting, and the banner-waving, the endless spouting-off, the silly slogans, stupid songs, chains of held hands, casual sex, the repeated display of their sentimental minds, the sharing of soggy butts, the petty violence—pushing, shoving, cursing, baiting; complaining that the rifle has replaced rationality while, with taunts, coercing the coercers: go ahead, hit me, arrest me, bloody my nose, I’ll be a heroine tomorrow to my bikeboy lover who’ll maybe let me wash his jockeys—he don’t wear socks till winter. I promise Planmantee that inside of ten years these
        saintly protesters will be selling shoddy in their papas’ business suits, and all will be as it has always been, because in the deceitful pursuit of self-interest nothing is altered but its occasional disguises, its alternative routes.
          Meanwhile, as 1 said, T.G. is being torn to pieces by the behavior of his firstborn. He doesn’t tell us what strategies he tries in order to bring his daughter round—what baits, what lures, what traps, what bribes, what appeals, what threats, what tirades or tears—but he fails to tame her. She continues to dance down the street shouting, "Wow, wow, wow, down with DOW!” and, as a gesture of generosity and a welcome to the new world, sleeping with strangers. The department wonders whether she also wishes to bear a bastard baby like herself. Finally—after months of this—she is expelled from high. T.G. does inquire about private schools—do we know of any good ones? scholarly, disciplined, cheap, and far far away. But he can’t afford such places, even with his new rank: his passel eats enough for a pack, the cost of every breath is going up, his relatives require assistance—the wop factor again—he has the usual installment payments, as well as Lire's bail to make. She continues to cost. Sometimes, I was tempted to suggest, you get a lemon.
          Apparently, T.G. thought to join her—become, in effect, a hairhead—but was rejected both by Lire and by Lire’s friends. Nothing about you is genuine, she is said to have shouted—a statement certainly accurate as to herself, but wholly mistaken about Tommaso, whose skin had begun to peel. He seemed to be allergic to something. His lank black hair began to clog his comb. He would frequently vomit after meals. His impacted wisdom teeth were pulled. Apart. Piece by piece. Well, Orpheus had no better luck.
                         Let’s say so long:
                         Napalm, Vietcong,
                         A-bomb, Vietnam,
                         Let’s say so long.
          Governali had always been opposed to the war. He simply had no interest in Asia, or in deeper Africa for that matter. Civilization's heart, for him, was the Mediterranean basin. This was a serious limitation in one whose conception of most things required a grand canvas or a mural-wide wall for their realization. Nevertheless I found his loyalty to his tradition—to Greece and Rome, Nineva and Gaul, to popes and Plantagenets, Rhine maidens, marble busts, and Neapolitan songs—rather winning . . . yes, winning, though woppy. So his opposition sprang from indifference as much as anything. Only one of his kids was male, and not soon draftable. Lire had grown like any ordinary peach, but was suddenly all pit; his life was full of grief; his eldest daughter radiated hate
          and called it free love; his nails lost their luster and began to split; she would remain away from home for weeks; both parents felt painfully responsible; “See you at the jail,” Lire would say with grim gaiety when again she went off. What could one do and yet avoid legal action or other similarly sordid resorts? T.G. and Lily—Lila?—Lola?—Lana? like Lana—dragged their embarrassed bodies to a psych; they took counseling like something for a cough; and Lire began penning poisonous letters to her father’s colleagues, people like me, who she assumed were opposed to the good, clean, drugstore-counter world she was romancing (with its smoker-for-every-pot and all the pigs in the pokey), not signing her screeds at all at first, and then only with a nom de plume—Mary Jane, for god’s sake—before finally setting down her own name, boldly scribbled, and even correctly spelled.
            When 1 brought my signed letter (with its anonymous partners) to poorTom-maso’s attention (into his purview, as we so inadequately say), his face fell onto the shaking sheet, clouding the gleam of its collegiate embossures, yet white as the page itself, both sides of his expression like the pale back and front of a dead man’s mask; and there within his disconsolate eyes, across the folds of his loosened skin, the letter’s message was reinscribed with the pain of a brand, especially its salutation: “You reactionary prick,” and including the suggestion that 1 was a secret “gunsucker,” an evil masturbator incapable of “public cum.” Public, I thought with wonder when I read it. Public cum? Perhaps she meant to contrast an openly professed love and its barefaced virtue, with the hand-performed, private, and shamefully hidden kind. Or maybe she meant 1 lacked the desire to fuck everybody. If so, she was wrong about that. Fucking everybody has always been my deepest wish.
            T.G., pale and weak, had to read Herschel’s; ill as he was, he had to examine Plan’s; Culp fed him the gist of the letters he’d received, which Culp said contained drawings which would have put out Oedipus’ eyes. Plan, she said, was a traitor to the cause. He sat shitting on the sidelines, but the revolution didn’t need his asshole’s odious rahrahs. Herschel, the most moderate of men, was condemned as a wimp who was willing to settle for being pissed on so long as it wasn’t upon his face. With Culp, Lire reached such rhetorical heights, I had to suspect he had given her the benefit of his witty and scabrous revisions.
            When he could sleep, Governali woke with nosebleeds; a rash covered half his face, and circled his neck like a noose; he had chewed his broken nails past the quick; they bled on his memoranda. His wife, Lana, had wept, he said, her whole soul into her helpless hands. I advised Tommaso to steel his heart with hate as I had. At least put a wall of indifference around it so gateless it can't be breached and betrayed. Few fathers can grin through the pain their daughters will inflict upon them. Sons may be their fathers’ pride and so can dismay it,
       but it is their daughters dads love and who will be their undoing. Usually by fucking the always wrong young dick.
         Who of us could have come to Govemali with the truth: your daughter believes her mother is a whore; she, herself, is a bastard; and you are a laughable cuckold?
         But the streets are full of people being obnoxious in the cause of peace. I remembered the storm troopers and the meaningful discipline of their violence. Just like Lire, their banners spoke of the public weal while their boots settled private scores. 1 find the weaknesses of the present—its pedestrian vices, its paltry passions, its press-agent posturing—embarrassing, as though 1 were witnessing a poorly performed play; and I have, in effect, left the theater. Although much of the hoopla is inescapable, I nevertheless have, as the sillies sort of say, turned in, tuned out, dropped off, gone quite away into the peaceful silence of my page, the slow cold work of my cellar, the sweet reenactment of my bitter former days.
         T.G.’s tough go concluded in the oddest fashion. He had seen his daughter with her friends at a rally and followed them to a house near the campus where these creeps crept to crash after their drug-induced flights and their barely organized public breast-beating. [ gather Tommaso bullied his way in, confronted Lire, argued with a lover, and was given a drugged drink. On his sorrowful way home, in the anonymous center of some sidewalk, he entered acid heaven, though without a hallelujah.
         The police brought him home first, where his wife screamed, and then to the hospital, where she fainted. Governali went, apparently, quite round the bend. But when he returned to his norm he nonetheless wasn't, hadn’t, didn’t, because, according to him, he had experienced the hereafter; he had crossed the great divide; not by dying and miraculously returning to life, rather more simply by making a visit. He had breathed indescribable light; he had seen regions where sensations lay in meadowish stretches like long grass; he had eaten of the tree of eternity; he had had thoughts which were pure perfume, yet practical as toothpicks; he had swum in alpenglow, touched a breast which felt like music; in short, he was a changed man, this vision had altered even his alter ego, certainly the condition of his skin radically improved; he slept like a log would if logs could; forgot his family for all important purposes; and started work on a description of the paradise which was presently under construction right under our noses, since what he had witnessed was to be an actual and operative part of history (as some of us might manage to witness if we were patient enough and as lucky as he had been), inasmuch as the hereafter was after all exactly that: the time to come; and it was a world where mind had conquered matter at last, as Aristotle had so wisely foretold; consciousness was all there was—con-
           sciousness and its equipment—a consciousness no longer merely yours and mine but ITS—the thoughts of a dreamily thoughtful god—while body was no better than bad breath, soon sprayed away or eaten by spongy esters.
             This nuttiness (for how else could we regard it?) did not in a meantime while itself away, but hung on to his head for dear life; it was as though his brain had been bagged; he could not see beyond that pernicious drop of acid; his classes began to run away, and trains of thought, which we had once upon a time tolerated, seemed turned into toys by some malicious Circe—chuff chuff chuff goes the Catholic Church into its station, shush-a, shush-a, shush-a, hush—a Circe contained in a chemical, a witch who was always stirring her spell-blinding brew and changing T.G. into a fruit stand. Governali has gone utterly Croce, Planmantee said. According to our seer’s new view, technology would triumph by designing such drugs as would allow us to enter our own minds, to pass, that is, from minds to Mind, although, as 1 gathered, reason was only a vacation visitor, mostly this Mind was a wallow of mush and a dell of delirium, where metaphor made hay and synesthesia ran wild. Tommaso always wanted to be thought of as a visionary, Herschel said with his customary regretful tone; now he has been cursed by becoming what he dreamed—a dream.
             When we leave the “my” mind to enter true mentality, we leave behind all ordinary perceptions of the world; consciousness invents its own objects and no longer needs to depend on the limitations of external reference (Governali had gone into a declamatory mode), but lest you think that personality perishes there, 1 anticipate you and reply that each individual now creates its own creatures, its own landscapes and multiple mirages of mood, which every other mentality may then enjoy as they please, for thoughts are like furniture—solid, ornate, or Swede—fancies fly like exotic birds, and feeling is something you breathe. Ah . . . said Herschel. Ah . . . said I. Culp wants to know whether we would like to hear his newly revised version of dear Dido and stalwart Aeneas, an intercession for which we are properly grateful.
                                     Dido wrote to Aeneas,
                                Why don't you sail by and see us,
                          I’m here all alone with my lust and no phone, half dead of desire, my crotch quite on fire, which I’ve heard you’d put out with your penis.
           Unlikeliest of all, I even laugh.
             As the months pass, Governali’s dreamscapes fade, but his new normality is drab; he lacks the old spark; back in one piece again, he is no longer the same
      whole. Lire does not seem—ever—on his mind. He makes no mention of her. He comes and goes like a shadow on a drawn shade. His voice is never raised. He has ceased publishing (I suppose writing, too), and appears to be content to remain in his present rank for the rest of his career. I forget his wife’s name. Now nothing but an odd and seldom circumstance will remind me of how Governali fled hell by entering heaven only to find that hell had got there ahead of him disguised as a Disney movie, and how at last he sank into a purgatorial funk, free of both his future and his past because he had made a sacrifice, as though it were a willing victim, of his present.
         Common wisdom says that time is a great healer, and perhaps it is true, although I have always found time to be a wounder too. Perhaps as fast as one wound heals another festers: certainly a tick accompanies every tock. Perhaps Culp is correct and we need wounds in order to feel the healing. In any case, of late, Governali seems both impervious and resigned: impervious to the protests which still go on; impervious to the fate of his daughter who has disappeared; impervious to the painful life of Lisa, his wife (as far, at any rate, as we know it); resigned to the loss of his eminence and the excited reception of his books; resigned to the disappearance of his vision—his brief sojourn in concrete consciousness, his tour of objectified mind; resigned to his lot as a loser, reconciled to being a castaway cause, a quiet drudge, an accomplished good-as-goner because he has begun to put on weight since he took up cooking, collecting Italian wines of good vintage from the best regions and frequently wiping his mouth. Because he messes about in his garden, his hands are coarsening (the crude class ring he’s chosen to wear doesn't help). His complexion, now without rashes, is sallow, his chin is contemplating its coming double, his eyes sometimes grow moist with reminiscence, and an occasional laugh shakes his frame. In short, I say, after many moltings, his real and original nature is on display: that of the central Tom-maso Governali, Os’ eame, if you like, his secret seed. Well . . . what a wop.
         Still, the days which were are the days which will be, as it’s always been; and perhaps our familiar Tommaso will return; perhaps his former self will surface; any moment now his hand will close upon my elbow to entreat my attention, and he will start to spout the story of Pepin the Strong or Peter the Weak, heatedly, with force, like steam from a kettle; any moment I’ll force a smile to my reluctant mouth like a berry seed, and seek some escape. Like layers of irritation, maybe our Governali is lying doggo down between his own toes, waiting the right rub, a moistening jog, in order to come to life again. His red rash, perhaps, has only faded as the writing on Lire s letters has, to be borne by embarrassed blood out of the immediate sight of life; and 1 shall see all T.G.’s symptoms again on the day he circles me to explain the causes of his pain, and what a misery it was, drugged by your own daughter, to enter heaven facedown on a fucking sidewalk.
                            Herschel Honey
            Walter Henry Herschel has ears. He is a short, slightly stout, gray-haired man with a small mustache stuck to his lip in a messy way like a poorly attached disguise. I think they're called jug ears. Anyhow, they stick out at nearly right angles, and since he keeps his hair cut to military specifications, not much masks their connection to his skull—a connection which is as blunt as a potter’s thumb. The prominence of Herschel’s ears is appropriate, because Herschel knows how to listen; Herschel will follow and can understand even ideas he intensely dislikes; and even to those, Herschel can sympathetically respond. He is what we resemble when we say we are “all . . .”
            Standing alone in the middle of a public john, Herschel would still seem lost in a crowd. He is the kind of failure no one notices, no one exults over, no one mourns, not only because Herschel never complains about anything, but because no one credits Herschel with ambition, purpose, urges, points of view, a tender ego, calculation. I nearly always call Herschel by his last name, even when I’m only floating him to the surface of my consciousness, because if I refer to Herschel as ‘he’ or ‘him,’ the subject of the pronoun is likely to be lost by the time my stream passes over the next rock. ‘Walter’ won’t suffice. I know a number of Walters, and Herschel could never push his way into their forceful company.
            Walter Henry Herschel. Not bad. If the name belonged to someone else.
            So we say someone of Herschel’s sort is self-effacing. Yes. The tangential is his true territory. Yet he does so much more than remove his physical appearance, when it comes to exercising the skill of being invisible while in the presence of people, because he never seems to leave a trace: napkin, pipe ash, whiff of cologne, a soiled glass, dented pillow, fingerprint or muddy track; his voice is soft, soothing yet sugarless, deferential, low without sounding sexy, clear though, crisp enough, unaccented, unaffected, proper without being prim—in short, ideal if it were a telephone operator’s, or if you wished to speak to the dying. Nor is one ever aware of Herschel’s being at the edge of the party, peripheral to the meeting, left out of the conversation, although that is where you would find him if you thought to look. He passes through life like light through a membrane, as if without remainder, never sustaining an injury or giving offense, neither as an actor, an object, nor an agent, not even as a pause, a hemhaw, a fleck of punctuation.
         Yet when I talk to him sometimes, 1 hear my voice returning to me larger than it left; 1 find my thinking clarified, my mistakes disclosed, just by being spoken into him, because he naturally knows how to echo: first from this surface of consideration, then from that; each time differently, directing, bending, shaping the conception, allowing all its holes to fill with further holes until it comes back hollow as a shell, and you are left with only your memory of how it once reverberated; how before, when it departed your sunny solicitous shore, your thought was vital, energetic, sea deep, insistent as surf, and how now it is tiny, tinny, thin, an alien husk, a brittle bit of calcified skin some worm’s worn.
         So he is a tamer, a normalize^ a sensible sounding-board; he calms down the demons of disappointment which daily torment me, and which then bedevil my views of people and their history in the angriest way by pushing them along faster and further than they should be pushed, formulating them in the harshest, most uncompromising terms, as if they were precocious kids early able to compose avant-garde sonatas, yet not yet ready for sex. 1 don’t know that Her-schel knows me, although he has had his chance. 1 don’t know if Herschel retains a copy of the confessions he hears, whether he does a digest, or composes an apologia; because he is incredibly tolerant of repetition; he listens to you chew as if each chaw were something new, not the same old grass in the same old jaws, destined for the same old cud and ruminative stomach.
         He does not try to finish your sentence, as Planmantee and Governali do, even when your thought halts on its way as though winded; or when it gets lost, or turns back, or dies on the spot, he does not try to draw it a map, urge it on, or give it the kiss of life. No, he waits as the page waits, and the space of my work waits, noncommittal as an ocean about a log; waits without raising its voice, without interrupting, objecting, editing, adding on, turning to its own purposes what is given to it, monkeying with its terms, interfering with its pace, distracting it from its course; no, he waits without scorn or a sneer anywhere in his soul, or Plan’s sense of superiority which must look at whatever is offered it as though it had been dragged through the dust like a cat’s catch; yet this very openness—humility, if you like—which is Herschel’s central trait and treasure, has also caused me to feel uneasy, anxious, insecure; because oddly enough it has made me dependent, it has made me desire Herschel’s continued welcome, Herschel’s good will if not Herschel’s good opinion, like a hotel whose service, ambiance, and setting you value, whose attention you wish never to lose, whose flattering deference is finally why you are willing to book rooms, extend your stay, overtip and overpay; so I have become fearful of finally reaching the end of Herschel’s patience, testing Herschel’s tolerance and finding its limits, discovering Herschel’s true opinions and possibly learning how resilient they have remained, how low and hardly out of the water they are,
           how nevertheless contrary and menacing, as though 1 were a vessel running aground and having my hull ripped open by ugly, inconsequential rocks—a reef rising, for no other reason than to demonstrate my mariner’s incapacities, out of a clear, calm, and easily surveyable sea.
             Yet there is something else. Yes, he deflates you without leaving you feeling flat, or driven down the road on your rim. Indeed, though free to roam and run wild, he keeps you sane and in the center. He also gives your subject sympathetic, though just, attention ("all ears,” again); and he helps preserve your babe in the woods from its predators by lending it a bit of the strength it needs to overcome its enemies, as well as a touch of the cunning required to elude its friends; however, there is also the sense, as when you’ve been on a journey, that your thought’s appreciation of its object has been made more humane, is perhaps as critical as it was, but less cruel; that it has received the kneading necessary to be a tightly textured, still light, loaf, even if half baked.
             Herschel haunts hallways, walks with you from department mailbox to the doorway of your office, leans against corridor walls, listens while studying cur-dled-cream ceilings, doesn’t seem to mind, as I do, whatever is overhead—a milk-glass globe, maybe, its light all skim.
             What Herschel has taught me, by being his deeply inconsequential self, is not that there is no reality; that there are no events “out there” solid enough to sustain a spider’s scrutiny or a waterstrider’s scoot (for that is what I am tempted to believe when I am solely on my own); rather his inadvertent existence has proved to me that the real is harder, indeed, than a dry roll; that everything that happens is as tough as tempered steel, stainless as a steel sink, sharp, if it needs to be, as a Spanish blade, blunt as any iron sledge, greedy and as eager to grab for its own good as a thief, cruel, unforgiving, inexorable—all the harsh hard unbending brutal words: in sum, the firstborn fact, from which we should never allow ourselves to be estranged, is—yes—simply—that there are facts. Whoopee.
             There are facts, but we don't know them. Nah . . . you don’t say? what a pity!
             Ah . . . then they know us.
             Hearing the news, Planmantee's bottle-bottomed eyeglasses would grow moist with emotion, ready to ring everything in his sight. "Die Welt ist Alles," he would reverentially sigh, "was der Fall ist." But I could only remember Mad Meg’s treatment of historical data as maliciously malleable, and wonder how I could have retreated from my master's dictum: data are dogs; they merely need to be trained. What’s this? Hard facts, you say? stubborn data? Meg would exclaim, his voice rising on the thermal of his incredulity.
             Yet Herschel would be the first to remind me that stubbornness is after all only stubbornness—a set of the will—-and steel and iron and ego are subject
       to scratches, nicks, rust, altruism, breakage, weariness, change of heart. And lest 1 then was about to run off in the other direction, he would warn me, with that slow and deferential smile his mustache always messed, that, while rocks could be crushed, the rock that Dr. Johnson kicked had more reality, didn’t 1 think, than his refutation? The rock, I reply, was Dr. Johnson’s pighead.
          The historian has to be honest, Herschel always says. I say it is a comedian’s word. Written on a slip and sold in Ben Franklin’s Five & Dime. Culp would rhyme it with ‘travesty.’ My Meg would have banished the word from his hearing, had it been uttered there, his scorn burning all before it like brush. Honesty is the historian's hardest hoe, Herschel insists, but he insists only by shaking his head, hence wagging his ears, like a pooch wanting a forgiving pat. One lab, you know, resembles another, he says, and whatever is done there is covered with checks like a loud, unlablike coat (Herschel’s hands almost execute a gesture); whatever is done proceeds in accord with an accepted method: if you are careless, your missteps are set right; if you are biased, you get corrected; if you aren't honest, you get caught; the cheater, the fudger, the plagia-rizer, the dupe, the fraud, are sooner or later dead ducks, an entire period can be convicted of prejudice; but when historians do any of these things—lying, forgery, obfuscation, special pleading—the worst they are charged with is misinterpretation; historians are distant witnesses, and it is difficult to prove perjury against them; so even if they do do a dirty on the job, they can't be put away, no one can claim damages, not from the grave; their worst punishment might be a loss of standing in the profession, a slowed-up process of promotion, a scowl from a colleague, which he's likely to get anyway, and without writing a word or uttering an opinion, much less twisting a tale.
          That’s why the historian’s creed has to contain a belief in the ultimacy of facts-—not their rock-ribbed and everlasting permanence, but their relative resilience to tampering, to falsification. After all, no currency can guarantee it will keep its buying power constant, yet the difference between genuine cash and the counterfeit remains. Without a faith in facts—yes, 1 guess that’s what it is, Herschel confesses when confronted by my jubilant frown—there is nothing to hold the historian down, he will fill with his own conceit and float off over every—well? what?—maybe treetop; for to permit the world to go soft, as some would like, is to make the truth totally an instrument of power, and a tool of business, church, state, and special interest, of every imaginable ideology and benighted cause.
          That's what causes are, 1 answer in Mad Meg’s mode; they are lies that advertise, lies that have fan clubs. Facts trip the thief up, Herschel replies, though wanly. The cops who catch the crooks, 1 say, my sententiousness exaggerated, are only crooks of another color. Herschel sighs as if he were really
           sighing. The criminal believes in the value of what he steals. The pirate’s chest is a fact, then, I ask, and is its value another, and its theft a third? The yardarm, too, Herschel says with his soft smile, the smile which makes you want to kiss him. In the realm of the factual, the rope’s the most. My magical mentor, Mad Meg, had lost that faith, the faith in the fact, if he ever possessed it. His belief was in the force of fiction. No one really wants the truth, he always argued. Its possibility is despised. And if it existed, it would nevertheless be ignored: the ugly slut that sits outside of the system, with nothing to offer but despair and constraint.
              I am surprised by Herschel’s vehemence on this point. He is normally nothing but what is expected. Honesty is the historian’s Holy Grail, he vows. Although the cup is the end of every search, he must drink from the chalice before he begins. That catch is his curse.
              I have to wonder whether I wanted this ' honesty aria." Had I called for it, like old King Cole for his fiddlers three? 1 certainly haven’t a merry old soul. Culp has characterized my so-called self as the sink of persnickety. Anyway, Herschel has the pipe, the sky, the bowl. Yet, to lean a little love of virtue against my own apparent inclinations, 1 still continue, rather devotedly, to think, to feel, to hope, he may be right; all the more because of the pertinence of his traditional position to my present work on Nazi emblems—the multiple meanings of their shapes, the quality of their design, the way in which contexts of control, of custom as well as contemporary purpose, determine their success—since each one is like a piece of spoiling meat which could use the cover of Herschel’s honey. Even a skull, sewn on a coat or a cap, is just a jack-o’-lantern, a joke, and the human bones crossed beneath it simultaneously a sign of pirates, poison, and playtime, perhaps a marked spot, a cancellation, railroad crossing, or pair of drumsticks awaiting their drum. Bum-a-bum. Amid all this din of designation, what is what? Death is painted black when it’s not white.
              Maybe Walter is the heroic fact himself. How many times have I sent a roundly arranged and always thick-skinned notion of mine—skeptical, relative, ironic, cavalier—to audition in Herschel’s studio, as though it were a space for rent; and how many times have 1 heard it hit some defiant, distant, resilient wall, and return with a bruise as a witness to its bounce? There is the case of nomos versus physis, for instance. My thesis, taught I thought by my mentor, Magus Tabor (peace to his spirit)—that there is no Nature which we are compelled to obey, only a Culture which various interests conspire to place on its empty throne—is a satisfyingly gloomy point of view which I tried out in Her-schel’s hearing half a dozen times, only to have the heresy sent back to me— when I dispatched my radically relativistic and cynical formulation, “There are no goals, and only errant ways”—revised and replaced by a phrase even more
      succinct, “Few ends, yet many means." One pole is sufficient, Herschel says, to hold up the tent.
         The end at which all actions aim. Oh dear. As Aristotle argued. Eudaemo-nia. Dear me. Entelechia too. Will fashions never change?
         Then Herschel does this sly thing to me, which always works: he suggests that relativism as a practice, although it appears to favor a kind of valueless democracy of ideas (Herschel is aware the word ‘democracy’ makes my stomach steam its beans), while actually serving a commodity culture where all the goods in the store have to be called equally great buys, though some cost more than others because they are better suited, it’s said, to a high roller’s lifestyle— Baptists don’t drive Jags, for example, unless they preach sermons on the radio—(Herschel is meanly aware that even a whiff of consumerism will fire my ass like a cannon), that relativism as a theory really reflects an intellectual failure of nerve which is the result of Colonial guilt, commercial greed, the pla-cation of the mob, and a total loss of taste, as though one’s tongue had wrapped itself around a tree.
         Just think, Herschel reflects, so earnest on my behalf, just think about the motives of those who hire these sophists, about the ends of men who employ expensive denigrators to reduce the value of truth to the price of day-old bread. Whoo, 1 ask with a laugh, whoo? whoo? Though he knows i must be thinking, meeee . . . the moe in the meeny of motive . . . meeee.
         And Herschel coughs up his sleeve, returns a mildly smiling face to me, and resumes his customary silence with such an absence of rancor or complaint, 1 feel obliged to prod him back into business. Okay, go on, who? I contritely ask. They come in two sizes, like most underpants, Herschel says seriously. (The distinction is Culp’s, and it’s between boxers and Jockeys, but 1 don’t care to correct him, what the hell.) Revolutionaries and other malcontents, because they are not in the place of power, or perhaps, in a nation, are the country’s restive minorities, or sometimes because they are spiteful courtiers out of favor: these desperadoes—sort of, aren’t they?—preach a rigid dogma to their followers, and wild relativism to the rest. Anarchists. Communists. Suffragettes. Separatists. Special pleaders. Splinter groups. Sects. That way they try to weaken official opposition, and get a hearing for themselves. Foxes make good chickens, the foxes say, pretending to cluck kindly in the direction of the henhouse. Then, having tempted tolerance to get in, their fangs vote. That other bunch of underpants which you and I talk a lot about, Kohler (Herschel means Jockeys), are the fat cats of business, who meow only for money, and who sell systems of belief like shoes: hey! all our stuff is great, guy! what's your size? how about something pointy and two-toned, in hand-spoiled leather, a bit of renamed Muslim or “born again” Christian—just your style, and the latest vogue.
              Such ebullience! quite untoward. From whence comes this angry enthusiasm? this condemnatory glee? Herschel has borrowed my mower and 1 want it back. He’s using my shtick to beat his dead horse.
              Has Walter been his usual self lately? Lemme think. His wife, a pleasantly negligible frump, has begun dropping in on him, calling him "Herschel honey” in front of indifferently everybody, and dithering about. Maybe Herschel’s ears have wilted some. He seems grayer than his usual gray Yet he also seems more assertive—I'm not sure—perhaps the wind is blowing strongly from a different direction. He’s in the john a lot. I often see him standing up to a urinal as though he were thinking to wear it home, his bad eyes pressed into the crack of a book held just before his nose as if he were a priest and it were a cross. Funny. Herschel honey Really, he’s okay, the same, his messy mustache is no worse off, it’s just me, dirt in my nails, desperation in my throat, I want to scream in those hallways through which the students stream, into all those awful classrooms, at offices whose doors only dirty their ways, at each ceiling of curdled cream, as if it covered coffee; but soon it is another day, and for another day, I don’t.
              Maybe the Nature you mean is simply a set of strong suggestions, Herschel says, and a Culture (molded by climate, geography, and other local conditions) is a hopeful selection of makeshifts. 1 make a moue. The command “Try to survive,’’ Herschel hurriedly goes on, in order to placate me, may not sound categorical, but it does sound reasonable; it doesn’t make the whole world do its bidding, and if you're ardently against doing what you’re bid, you can always confront the damnable dicta, make your objections, and blow your brains out to prove your point; but there isn’t much which—on the whole—unrecommends it.
              That man must shit if he eats, Culp says, is conditional.
              Herschel rarely speaks positively; he maybes his way along, undertowing everything, so whatever notion is in question is pulled invisibly out to sea; his negatives softening the glare of his scrutiny like the heavily decorated shades of lamps. Are you sure, I say with mock severity.
              I don’t know, Herschel says, more mildly than mozzarella, I never thought being reasonable meant being sure. Herschel, 1 realize, has dandruff, and in a draft sometimes it drifts down his sloping shoulders. Being reasonable is simply being reasonable; and I never found much that was very reasonable about being sure; being sure suggests you’re nervous; what kind of guarantee does a person need that it won’t rain before planning on a picnic? On the other hand, not being sure doesn’t mean you’re unsure, either. I sum up: you can hem, then, without having to haw. And haw without having already hemmed, Herschel says, whether adding or subtracting from me, I’m not sure.
        The little flakes remind me of Planmantee and the motes which make up his cereal version of history. Each one would be a datum, and the relation of each with each would be another datum, amounting now to dozens and dozens. Then these we would choose, on account of their resemblance, to group together—Herschel’s head on Herschel’s shoulder. Gradually, in this patient way we would accumulate a whole Herschel to relate, mote by mote, to maybe me and my motes, maybe to his moppy dog and his dog's flop of hair, maybe to his smelly pipe, to the ash which he knocks from its nose, and which resembles dandruff to such a degree (except for the black tar at the bottom of the bowl which occasionally—pepperlike—mingles with it when he scrapes it out) that 1 sometimes wonder if Herschel’s head shakes onto his shoulders after all, or if it isn t just tobacco ash like dust adrift on his sloping suit.
        So Herschel leaves bits of himself behind, after all. As always, by thinking of him, I am moved to tenderize my tough first terms. Herschel’s residues, however—pipe ash, skin scruff, suchlike, a nicotine-stained forefinger and inner thumb—are as unnoticeable as he is: smoke in yesterday’s wind.
        Herschel honey. She is shorter than he is. Wears shapeless granny dresses colored plum. Faraway gaze, somewhat wet. A bit plump, too, as Herschel is, not majestic around the middle the way I am, and she isn’t hugely bosomed, either, just a little hilly, her hair streaked, face soft, as if her features were aftermaths of a finally released tightwad. She comes by, stands next to the office door, waits, knocks, waits while he reaches it, and says hi Herschel honey tenderly enough, yet as if she were tired of the idea, solicitous, I guess, then goes in, his shadow, behind the knobbled glass, pretty much blotting hers out.
        ‘Dandruff.’ Strange word. Scurf. What relative was it who used to claim his shoulder flecks were bits of brain? Reason’s rust. Upper crust.
        Governali can’t stand Planmantee's moneylike amassments. He would want to know, as if he were selling the cure, what sort of effect Herschel’s careless grooming habits have on the attitudes of others, because events become historical for him only if they bloom in a consciousness like roses in a garden. We do not accrete, he says, we grow. To study anything else is to study what he calls geology. When I think of my colleagues careening around through these arguments like kids on trikes, I think the kinks are in charge of the hose, and nothing will be watered unless the tube bursts.
        Minor embarrassments are not a part of history, Planmantee says. Contrary to rumor, B.O. has never been a cause. After every meal, reseat the teeth. I’ve seen Herschel brushing his in the faculty latrine. Not that fastidious a man, I'd thought. Yet . . .
        In a sense, I hate Herschel. It’s true, in him 1 see myself as seen in him— the me in thee for thou—the nobodynow—the guy who wrote an early little
           book, got lucky and took tenure when it was an undefended town, and who faded into the wallpaper, became a greasy spot over which flies walked— nobodynow so successfully he must have been nobodythen—wived by a cow, calamitously screwed by the academy and its committees, kidded to death, both his boys sallow and stupid, career done in by the simplest of circumstances, shit, so when I see Herschel in the hall, or in the loo, I have to see something of my way of being seen there too, despite our differences—no cow for him, no kids—among them the fact that Herschel seems at peace, at home in nobodyville while 1 curse both home and office ceilings, every sky, its clouds, and all their scudding.
             Well, I wonder, Herschel, if there's a real Real behind all this rigamarole, why don’t we say what it is? Herschel waits awhile. Yes, he says. Saying is the problem, isn’t it? Most people, everywhere, through most of History’s eras, too, agree about the value of things like courage, truthfulness and honesty, 1 think, but they fall afoul of one another when they try to say why, or even describe what each virtue actually is. I remember watching a group of philosophers walking their minds around a coin one of them had placed upon a table. They all saw it, knew what it was, could have picked it up and spent it, but none of them could agree they should be sure they saw the same penny, either from moment to moment or among themselves, or where, in reality, the penny was, how their various perspectives could be reconciled, how they could develop a proof, or defend its denial; and as they walked away furiously quarreling, the last to leave simply picked it up and put it in his pocket, where presumably, being unobserved, it might have suffered extinction, although the young man who argued that sort of Berkeleian point of view was the one whose hand reached confidently into his pants to fetch the conveniently rematerialized coin when he needed a quarter for a Coke.
             So our failures do not lie in the flabby irresolution of reality, I eagerly continue in order to soften my ridicule, so our failures lie in our accounts. 1 love this part of our conversation, because Herschel listens like an animal to the movements of my mouth. It is very flattering in a vulgar yet subtle way. Our accounts, I say, as breathlessly as I can, anointing my voice with hollow wonder, our accounts . . . our accounts . . . our accounts: when they are not absurd fancies or outright lies or mad misconceptions or manipulative tricks (a category which covers most of our ideologies with dirt fresh from the grave), they are invariably prejudiced, partial, incomplete, confused, unbalanced, injudicious, lacking the necessary objectivity, the necessary tender regard, the requisite mix, the awed appreciation of complexity, its supple shadings, its fine proportions, almost unheard harmonies, its inconsistencies, melangeries, the endless intermingling of contraries which comprise it, the extenuations of
      which it is made like the mud which makes bricks, yet its straightforward simplicities, its dashed-off lines, or, again, its unaccountably sudden eruptions, the kinds of chaos which create its causes and their orderly operations: that is to say, to cite, among facts, the second one we should not lose sight of: reality has many of the marks of a work of art.
         That nails it. Herschel claps me on my book bag. It makes me feel good when he says “That nails it.” I am like a child with him, wanting even the most automatic reassurance, accepting anything good manners can manage as coming from the heart. But you couldn’t call an account inaccurate, Herschel says, between heartfelt heaves of chest, or oversimplified, he continues, or wholly wrong, he concludes, if nothing were there to provoke the charge, and demonstrate its worth.
         But I am headlonging right now, and heedless as a kid making out. The courage of my convictions has probably uncoiled from a lower spring. “Like,” remember 1 said ... I said no more than “like" a work of art. By Proust. By Cervantes. Okay, Casanova. And remember that 1 said only “many of the marks,” and many makes for merely . . . But a work of art which not even the most highly refined science can hope to comprehend, not in large or in its smallest part, because there are no parts, if by parts one means elements fundamentally on their own: no, there are only endless relations and the properties to which they give rise; partialities, shadings, hints, secret sympathies, hidden harmonies, each relating and rerelating, turn and turn about, integrating and reintegrating over and over, the way night and day do, or like lovers, repeatedly positioning and repositioning themselves—Herschel tries to interrupt but 1 won’t have it—for quality is qualification, qualification is modification, modification is malformation, it is murder, it is mess-up, and the mangling goes on and on without mercy, without respite, metamorphoses at a mile a minute; so that every honest history is a history of flickering, gleams from that so-called sword which stands for reality's brutal presence, traces of the passage, as though they were putty, of things into things—ore into iron, iron into steel, steel into beams, beams into buildings, these into rubble and ruin, landfill and weed lot—in short, the fragility, the brittleness, not of the fact, but of its continued, unbroken, and untransmogrified existence.
         Just so, St. Wally says, anointing me. But it is assumed, as you very well know, Kohler, by our type and tribe, that from the blend and bleed and balance of life, we can take away the few things which are important and hold them up like fish we have caught, tags on their fins containing their weight and length and place of capture, and that it is our business to arrange these trophies according to racial genus, regions of earth, and eras of time; to put them in stories as if they were Helens of Troy or at least mighty denizens of the deep; yes,
           right, I say, in the middle of his message, right, and make up plots and characters, and create suspense and cause climaxes, just the way Governali would stage it in Milan; with particular emphasis, Herschel says, on politics and economics, as if governments and their heads, wars and their costs and outcomes, were—exactly, that’s what Magus Tabor always said—when so many other things matter, Herschel endeavors to continue, and matter more and more as time goes on—because there are no locales, I interject, where insulated lives can be lived, safely contained within a few ages and acres—and no more ca-tastophes which can be kept in a can, Herschel says, so they do not rouse and trouble every hill, town, and urban avenue—sure, not a cough which may not carry flu to Finland or a killing which can occur without an epidemic of unclean hands—consequently, Herschel says, when you said reality was like a work of art, you meant this total interfusion, this Hegelian whole, which cannot be but partially grasped—
             Whoa! I’m getting off this wagon. Hegelian wholes horrify me. What has our conversation come to, Herschel, that you should be led to mouth the old mountebank’s name? the horseshit historian if there ever was a horse who shat hay!
             Well, I thought certain of your views bore a— . . . resemblance to the asslicker of the Absolute? Never. Perhaps an aspect here and there—in a bad light—right—from a haze-encoded distance—right—so that history has to be understood as the effort to describe the complex interconnections of life with Life—well, not exactly—concurrent events and relations—yes, I guess— presences in the same space, then?—well, simultaneously occurring ones, sure—and a “same space” is what exactly?—ah ... it would be defined by . . . ah . . . influence . . . the mutual reach of their influence—that's about as pointed as a broken pencil, can you be clearer?—ho, such high demands, Herschel, you should try—1 know, he says contritely—sure, I know you know—how hard—yes, how—it really is—okay, where was 1 with influence . . . what is influence? ... if I can hear the hunter’s horn, we are in the same forest. —Great! So a fact is—don’t prompt, if you must do something, hang Hegel—a fact is, how did you put it?—God, 1 can’t remember; did 1 put it? Well, was it (Herschel makes the suggestion) . . . the mutual influence of simultaneous presences in the same space? Hey—right, 1 say. Exactly.
             Herschel was indeed all ears. His ears were lobed as if it were a quality of fine fruit. I saw a sky cornered by clouds, and light falling through it to a painted earth. I said to Herschel, when I encountered him in the quad beneath a struggling sky, the light landing nearby by parachute, did you know that Marx calls Lassalle “a Jewish nigger”? Herschel holds his pipe so as to warm his palm. His ears turn toward me like an anxious animal’s. Like the moment, if you can believe it, when a fly lit on my peeing cock. It was in Paris, of course.
      And the fly stood as one stands to view the Falls. And I peered down on him peering, it seemed, on my peeing. I am compiling a list of unlikely anti-Semites, I said, and 1 entreat your help. A slate sky encircled by the soft. That's what it was. Softness was crushing the brittle stone dome of what we call the heavens. Do you want to tell me who is already on yours? A fly is on mine, 1 almost said. An unexpected visitor. Mooning at my honey. Skyfright overcomes me on occasion. Some people are fearful of heights or empty spaces or close containers or cunts with teeth. For me it’s a sky you could say was uncoloring. Light as from a faraway catastrophe. From a faded photo of the dust bowl days. Whose dire and distant consequences are nevertheless on a wire from Western Union. For rapid and personal delivery. In addition, I have that pissoir odor luxuriating in my nose. I’m sure Herschel hasn’t wet himself. I’m certain—I think I'm certain—I think I haven’t—when was it last I went? Oh well, I’m well, no need to worry. Voltaire, Luther, Erasmus, Karl Marx like I said . . . The stone was emptying out in leaden light. Just above us. Like a tipped basin. Voltaire, Luther, Erasmus, Marx, Herder, Heine, Wagner. Nothing unlikely about that, is there? the ears say. He stands close to me, Herschel does, and I smell the spray of the Falls. That Parisian instant. I don't mean unknown, I mean unlikely. Wagner remains unlikely. Voltaire, Luther, Erasmus, Marx, Herder, Heine, Wagner, Fichte, Kant—Kant? Aye, lad. Kant. The why is wondrous, gets to the heart, if there is a heart, gets to it; for the old fart would never have let fly even an odor without a good reason. He walked like a watch. The bluebottle flew and my disappointment was: I couldn't follow. Voltaire, Luther, Erasmus, Marx, Herder, Heine, Wagner, Fichte, Kant, those Karls, the Karl Marx, the Karl Gutzkow, Heinrich Laube. But Kant? When Kant looked at Jews he saw a tribe, not an assembly of free and independent minds who were ready to be rationally governed, morally motivated, and sustained by the Sublime—good grief—what was there to see when you saw Jews but the symbols and loyalties and observances of the cave? brother and sister squatting together with their relatives, reading from a book which reason—in the person of their own Spinoza—had exposed, praying to the preposterous, wailing in unison, curious of custom, clannish then, and subversive of the solitary self, in love with one another's blood, and tied to the earth by sacrifice, by pride, and beaten by a baleful god into black hats, coats, and ashes. O O, the lobes allow themselves to say. O indeed, Herschel. So Kant’s anti-Semitism couldn’t have been confined to Semites? No more than Plato’s to the tribes whose blundering ballots ruined Athens. Well, would you want to call him an anti-Semite then? O
      0  indeed, Herschel, no more than I would call myself one; but listen to the list: Voltaire, Luther, Erasmus, Marx, Herder, Heine, Wagner, Fichte, Kant—
      1  like him on here, gives the list a tone—Gutzkow, Laube, Moses Hess, Con-
           stantin Franz, Fries— Who are these guys? If religion is held within the bounds of reason, it will be squeezed like this sky, Flerschel, squeezed till the light falls dry on stiff grass or on gravel like this path—well—I am on a list, on a roll, 1 do have an unmentionable smell in my nose, and memories on my mind, but then 1 inadvertently look sort of between the ears, and there is Her-schel in some distress, what could be the problem? though I certainly don’t want to know, well, 1 do want to know but 1 don’t want to suffer his explanation, not beneath this yellowish lightfall, plash on the white stones of the gravel path, listen to my list and don’t bewail, couldn't I read about your problems in the papers? so what is it? for heaven’s sake, what, Herschel, could conceivably be the matter? listen to me, my list, names, what a roll! and I have only commenced; it is a list very long, unlikelies every one, it will never end, wait till I reach the Americans, how about Millikan? good start? 1 think Herschel must be ill; maybe he has peed in his pants, incontinence is a curse of some old ages, not that he’s that old, and of some diseases, infirmities of control, as Mad Meg must have lost it in the early stages of his palsy, pissed like a water pistol, hither and yon, as we did when kids, yes, to hit ants and flies and other bugs, anything alive that couldn’t get back at us, pure power, pissing is, along a concrete crack where ants have trod, the red kind rushing back to their hill, pee right behind like police with a siren, or like sunshine on their black backs, riverbating, the mighty flood flowing toward their home, 1 guess, if it wasn't a sandy outpost, can’t trust even insects, so 1 should inquire of Herschel how he is, and wonder delicately what is the matter, and put a little sadness on, a spray of concern like a manly cologne: Kant, hey, Fichte, Herder, mostly because of the betrayal of the mind, because it doesn't mean you support reason simply because you’re bright, or are a people of the Book, not if you go about black and ashy, not if you eat like a nit being picked, not if you have a big guy in the sky with hammer and tongs and scissors for circumcision; so Herschel, are you under the weather, maybe, and is the wife ailing or anything? his eyes have filled, 1 think, this is incomprehensible, not my list, Herschel, but you, yes, what are we going to, as we say, do with you? you are making a mark, leaving a trail, what will it do to your stand-aside life, your solo flight? above us I see heaven about to come down on us little chickens, and Herschel is leaning heavily on my arm here in the quad on the central path beneath the squeezed lemonlike light and the coarsely smothered sky, looking a little fog-filled himself or maybe caught in an inner downpour of rain—right, it drizzles in my heart as it drizzles on the town—Herschel, I’m disturbed, by your smell I don’t say, but there’s some dampness on the dry path just by his right foot, lean against me, I say, old man, not because he’s old, but because I’m trying to be distantly friendly like the English, hence I intend to say, and say, “old man", but did Herschel know the
      Jewish trinity, I ask, the monogod’s three public parts? Herschel has some sort of arm around me. Ahasuerus. Moloch. Mammon. What would have been your guess? I saw a sky like this force the sun down long before its time, into the ash of cannon fire and smoke rise, squeeze it like a blood-red eye. That’s a fact . . . come on ... A fact is the mutual influence of simultaneous presences in the same space. 1 mustn’t forget. What a fact is. That’s thunder. I've been wondering. We’re going to have one hell of a wind. Herschel has become hard to hold. Heavy. Hey, Herschel honey, I say, don’t water up, guy, nothing can be that bad. Walter, we’ve all had a shame or two spank our cheeks for us. I could never say Ahasuerus and get it right. Moloch, sure. Mammon. Easy. Ahasuerus is hardly a name, scarcely a word. Ahimsa is also hard. Herschel presses his face lightly into the curve of my neck, weakly, like a limp handshake, the whiskers which whisker his mustache palping me. Don’t. Don’t. But he’s commencing to cry in spite of his modesty and my injunction.
        1 suddenly feel as though his tears are mine, wept back to me, slightly revised.
          Scandal in the Schoolroom
          Here they all are, held in my head like a student of ancient customs might hold the Evangelists. Actually, I hadn't seen Culp for weeks. Had he been away, 1 ask. 111 say, Culp says. Down the hall. Ah. That far. Planmantee is sitting across from me, his stack of books in front of him like a pillbox. Il trionfo della morte. Laudi del cielo del mare della terra e degli eroi. What a lineup. Governali is looking at the twin ends of Planmantee’s scarf which have come down from his neck to lie on the table like an additional pair of arms. His look offers no opinion. Herschel is sitting uneasily on one of the benches beneath those inadequate windows. Does this mean he does not care to join us? And does that reluctance signify support for me? I hope this isn’t about Betty Boop again, I say boldly, but my sally is greeted with silence. Since we’re all here now, I suggest we begin, Planmantee says with his customary pomposity. Professor Governali will be keeping the record. Professor? it’s going to be that kind of meeting. ’Professor,’ as a term of address, is your ten-foot pole. And a record? well. Unless one of you wishes to bring up an additional issue (Planmantee straightens the books so they sit squarely in front of him, like a reviewing stand or a gallows), there are only two items on our agenda—rather sensitive matters, I might add—so that the usual confidentiality which covers these advisory committee meetings, the reasons for
           which are quite well known to you all, therefore 1 need not repeat them, except to say that of course suggestions and recommendations which we agree to pass from this committee on to our department chairman, particularly since they consist only of advice—and are in no way binding on him, as you know—if they were bruited about, apart from the violation of trust involved and the possible compromising of the chairman's decision about them, they might mislead others as to purposes and programs which the department has no wish to carry out, and might imply a divisiveness between this committee and the chair quite harmful to the general atmosphere which collegiality enjoys—vainly too, because, for the most part, no such division exists—so I shall not go into that, not now, but emphasize that in addition to these reasons for secrecy which you are aware of and apply normally to all of our meetings, there are additional ones, having to do with these particular agenda items, involving reputations of individuals, both faculty and students, as well as that of the department itself, and the university too, not to mention the possibility of bringing disgrace to the discipline, as well as soiling those principles which make any profession a profession in the first place, therefore the confidentiality which applies to our proceedings has to be considered more important to maintain than usual.
              It is Betty Boop.
              We shall come to our subject in good time, Professor Kohler, and in good order, if you will be so kind, if you will just be patient. I may say this, though, that we are forced to deal today with a Betty Boop of a different kettle.
              Aw, Kohlie, did you fall down and go Boop again?
              Okay, Culp, cut the clowning. You heard the maestro. What's the other mess-up?
              The other problem, if l may put it more politely, Professor Governali, is a repeat, as well, of a previous embarrassment: another Italian poet is being offered as a dissertation topic.
              Ezra Pound is not an Italian poet.
              The Pisan pissant.
              Don’t take that tone, Tommaso, it’s not constructive.
              A disgrace to Italian soil.
              More than Mussolini?
              A Fascist pig.
              More than Mussolini?
              Please. That is past. Must we wear these old things through every new day?
              I give Herschel a look. It is not like him to offer an opinion about anything unless forcibly and repeatedly asked. Poetic resignation is not his norm, either. But Herschel does not seem norm. He seems—well—sick. Haggard. Thin. Stooped. Worn.
          A good point, Professor Herschel. Very much valued. 1 suggest we consider first what we must do about those members of the faculty who persist, against all the canons of professional ethics, in taking advantage of their superior power and position . . . drone . . . drone . . . drone. Except for the Latinity of the language, Planmantee's speeches can be rapidly written, and their reading time need not be prolonged once you learn how empty of substance they are, but because Planmantee speaks in a very measured way, without hem or haw, in generally the same orotund tone of voice, they take forever to hear. Listening is like watching a bricklayer plant bricks. The lids of your ears grow heavy. Os may remember how his sentences began, but no one else does. Go on, Planny me boy, bore the bejesus out of us, 1 say to myself, go on, go on. ... and in an area of such delicacy and discretion, involving young people, many under twenty, from good homes, from the families of valued alumni, placing at risk our pool of potential donors, and endangering our recruiting efforts . . . Culp seems to be chewing at certain pieces of dead skin, if he’s not biting his fingernails. Governali is wound up about something, more like his old self. Herschei—unhappily—looks, well, hapless. So I'm being accused by all four winds. You don’t know, do you? I don’t say, what it’s like to put your hand on a strange young knee, feel the shiver of apprehension rise like steam from tea, and see in the eyes that wild trapped wary worried lip-licking look come and go, come and go, while your hand rests there, waiting for the eyes to decide, to debate the thigh s fate, before almost imperceptibly parting the legs—right, Culp, it’s like the Red Sea, miraculous—and then your hand slides such a small way forward, and now it’s too late to complain, for the knee should have rejected the hated hand instantly, the eyes should have angrily glared, the voice firmly rejected that wandering hand’s lascivious intention, but no, the frightened eyes thought about it—he wants to touch me, does he?—calculate the cost—what’s he prepared to pay?—quite a compliment, too, the old cock is extending—take a chance, it may improve your C—and now it isn't so bad, is it? like getting into a cold lake, taking the plunge, once in, it isn’t so bad, and now the hand is warm, its grip no longer foreign, like a garter’s, the thigh is warm, and eyes are warmer, too: why, professor. . . . solicitation of such favors for a possible grade, for example, places the honor of the system, the value of the system, the meaning of the system, in jeopardy . . .
          It is a joke, this system, whereby we legitimize mediocrity, guarantee it almost, grading, grading, grading, hell, if you sold an A for a suck it would have attained at last a real value; we teach, we judge, we validate, candidates for the system; we feed them like coins into the system's slots; ah, the system, the system, let us save the system, who is here who loves learning more than their creature comforts? let me slip it to the system, fuck the system, for here I am,
           surrounded by the system, the system speaking system as if system were a special tongue, as indeed it is (Planmantee knows it to the syllable) . . . accusations have been made, allegations brought to my attention as the advisor of undergraduate majors . . . Are you, Planny, that, now, too? didn’t you do that, Herschel, always? I thought it was your tithe to pay, your dues? to advise the sweet young things to learn about life from me? didn’t we have that agreement?
             Culp is holding a chortle clinic. He knows he is a dummy and I am literally his larynx, his secret source. He loves hearing himself in the voice of his thane. Herschel waves a vague paw, bearlike, swatting at a slow fly. I had, he says, to give it up. Ah. Give it up? It had become too much for me. Ah. Too much? . . . charges, I’m afraid I have to call them, Professor Kohler, which, since you’ve mentioned it, remind me of a previous case . . . Our Betty Boop, to be sure. It was our habit, I am afraid, to call her that, Planmantee says, apologizing on my behalf to the girl's ghost, the hypocritical Hoosier kraut, apologizing because we had to laugh at her plight, drool at the sight of her magnanimous chest, the pillowillowows she bore before her like gifts from the store, bore above a narrow waist and a rich round rump which partly placed in balance the generous outroll of her breasts—1 digress—tits held tight in a nipple-framing blouse of such a thinness that the shadow of each aureole showed, and any mouth a male eye owned, as I've said, made water at their sight, desire bloomed as the desert blooms after a rare rain— . . . and I’m sure we shall all agree that we cannot, as a responsible academic department, countenance such goings-on . . . Goings-on? I exclaim, you refer to my despicable comportment in this girl’s regard as “goings-on"? Professor Kohler, we are all quite aware of the callous disregard you regularly display for every norm and regularity, and it does not surprise us that you have decided to adopt this defensively jocular tone about charges so serious they endanger what little remains of your career—but please, Professor Culp (Planmantee has moved into his admonishment mode and turns to Professor Culp as a schoolmaster might to an unruly pupil), this is an affair of the gravest kind, we can’t enjoy your help if you’re giggling; what would the world think—our colleagues, our students, our deans, indeed—if they could hear us now, treating this matter, the way you two seem to be doing, as an opportunity for boyish banter? (Shark shows his teeth, turns back to me and then again to Culp.) Koh here hits the bell, you bong. Aren't you ashamed? (Spread your moral superiority about, stupid, I don’t say, you’ve already cost your case Culps vote.) Ah, Plan, I do say, your judgment is in error, for 1 am not treating this matter lightly, but with contumely, with disdain, with contempt; I am disregarding it like so much dog shit on a campus path; some part of my shoe is at risk, nothing more; I shall keep walking on until it wears off and its faint smell disappears.
         Who brought this information to you, Plan, and exactly what is the complaint, Governali asks. 1 think: bong the bell, not bad. No wonder he called me Koh and showed his teeth. Yes, 1 say, who is this Betty Boop Two who’s done the dirty to me on account of a failing grade? Planmantee again turns sharkly in my direction. Then you know, he says. So our complainee is a failee, Culp crows, intent on getting his own back. Consequently there is no point in continuing this stupid and sordid inquiry, I say, for clearly the accusation against me, whatever it is, is a case of aggrieved revenge. Herschel sighs: word against word again, 1 suppose. Not exactly, gentlemen, Planmantee loves to explain, for it was the girl’s roommate who brought the matter to me, very embarrassed she was, too, and frightened, but driven by duty— Ah. Driven by duty? Yes, Professor Kohler, driven by duty, a phrase foreign perhaps to your experience, driven by duty, embarrassed by what she felt she had to say to her professor— You have this tittie tattle in class? She is one of my better students, yes, of fine family, whose name 1 shall keep confidential for the moment. Well. Fine Family? One of Yours? Scoff as you must, Professor Kohler, caught in another of your dingy corners, for this young woman has reported to me, near tears, that her roommate (whose name I shall not immediately reveal, either), very upset— In tears, too, I suppose. —told her of how you had attempted to fondle her when she went to your office— To complain of failing, correct? to complain about her grade? to bitch about her paper—not enough comments on it, insufficient explanation of her F—though it was late, brief as doubtless her underwear, yet supposed to be work for a term, on— Yes, on what, Professor? what topic did you give this young woman, what sort of assignment was it? wasn t it on military brothels? wasnt it a deep embarrassment to her? wasnt it on a theme only you had researched, with materials far distant, in Germany itself to be precise, and didn’t you then threaten to fail her if she did not pursue the subject in lur—in lurid, in disgust—in disgusting detail, and didn’t you fail her then anyway when she tried to carry out your orders—for they were orders, werent they?— No. Not at all. Absolutely not. I don’t issue orders. Never. Never. You're not playing the record, Plan, you're playing the scratch. Then, according to my informant— So? informant? —she came to confront you about your treatment of her, and it was on this occasion that you backed her, she says, into a corner of your office and offered her a pass, putting your hands on her breasts in the meantime— In the what? In the meantime, yes, and that, when she tried to avoid your advances, you held her hard against the wall, actually shoving her into a shelf of books, some of which fell, and when you released her to retrieve them, she got away into the corridor and ran home, crying the whole way to her dorm— Weeping, you mean, weeping the whole way. Weeping, yes— So there are witnesses to this—to this publicly distraught behav-
          ior—to weeping and running, Governali wonders. Did people see the girl’s distress, would they testify to it, and to the time? you know, to all the necessary and relevant legal things? Meantime . . . meantime . . . and those books which fell . . . not the same, of course, as those books stacked before Planmantee now—my god—one of them is mine. That bodes badly indeed.
            “Well—Planmantee hesitates here. He’s not sure. After all, he was speaking to the girl’s roommate, not the girl. I am grateful for the “well,” oh yes, I love that “well,” and 1 say, I shout, of course, you pernicious bastard, you are dealing in hearsay, where is your notorious passion for evidence parked on this occasion? in what remote lot, you envious imbecile? Herschel yells at me not to yell. Culp curses me for cursing. 1 forget, he is a bloody Boy Scout. Governali is quiet, like the louse he is about to be. I am surprised, surprised, taken aback. Who has come to my defense, showed support, said something comforting, smiled my way, even looked in my eyes? I know. 1 know. 1 have no friends. Herschel? who yells at me not to yell. Culp? who curses me for cursing. When did I curse, I yell? I simply said—perhaps I did shout some—“you pernicious bastard.” Mild enough, considering the circumstances. We should get an official inquiry under way, Governali says; we should take this matter to the dean. First to the chair, surely, Culp says, he’s the guy we are supposed to advise. He won't do anything, Governali says, he’s afraid of trouble, he hates to cause the dean distress. We should go to the dean direct, to clear Koh’s name.
            Ah, 1 think, such solicitude for the rat’s sake from a snake. This committee, Herschel says, can only advise the chair. And Plan, you haven't heard the voice of the victim. Good, Hershey, 1 think, voice of victim is good. You’ve no evidence of so-called wrongdoing, I add. The grade is an F. The paper is still in the young woman’s possession, we can presume. She has not come forward. It is, as Herschel says, her word (which we haven’t heard), against mine, which we have. There is nothing to this but Professor Planmantee’s malice. No, wait, it was his duty to bring this to our attention, Governali (who says he wants to wipe clean my beshat reputation) says, excusing the Fart of Fort Wayne, who 1 know bleakly envies what he believes was my enjoyment of the boobs of Betty Boop. Piss on Plan. The waters of forgetfulness shall wash him away like a smear of shit on the enamel. He is red, oh red, rosy in the face. 1 am a happy man.
            Let’s not rock the paper boat, Culp advises. If this student wants to make an official complaint— And I think: none of these people behave at all according to their theories. They behave according to their characters. What are their theories, then? idle outgrowth of ego? they clothe themselves in these ideas, just as if that girl was—good guess—wearing falsies, and didn’t want her falsehoods discovered; sure, they pad their brains and hope they look brawny, but it’s only for show. They lead their lives with the equipment they've got, which
      is only a kind of character, a meager personality, not an ideology—at a party you couldn't tell the Hegelian from the positivist. Who were their mentors, that’s the question, and haven’t they simply aped their betters from the beginning, in order to get ahead, let their revered teacher feei their fevered brows, what a thrill, let me touch the tip of your intelligence, my my, sort of small, isn’t it, just a weenie, well ... I loved that “well."
        Whats the other problem. Plan, Governali wants to know, still looking to take my head away in his briefcase. Nuremberg Notes. That’s Nuremberg Notes he’s mincing between those two volumes of D’Annunzio. This preposterous proposal, Planmantee says, furious at everybody because we’ve all been pusillanimous to the point of perfection, haven’t we? we don’t want to ipsy-dipsy the bureaucracy’s even keel. I counted on that. Me: happy fella. This preposterous proposal for a thesis topic, he shouts in a forcibly normal tone of voice. The last clown we were asked to consider was Ezra Pound, and now this. Governali has his bite back. What, he barks, is Kohler up to now, vis-a-vis my native land? It’s not your native land. Must 1 remind you, your native land is a slum in New Jersey. (What a wop!)
        I am weary of this. My spirit suddenly deflates. Is it in relief at having escaped, do I have to say again? from what could have been a most miserable mess? Our performance of the Scandal in the Schoolroom has been postponed to a more propitious date. I guess.
        1 feel that we, as a responsible Department of History, can no longer countenance dissertations of this dubious and even comical kind, Planmantee is asseverating—is that it?—of whatever can you be thinking, Kohler? such stuff: D'Annunzio, Duse, and Duce? Now I can be called Kohler. Blunt as a blow. We’ve come to the infighting—not so much the moral tone, which has to come from on high, to halo his words like a saint’s head, as the teacher’s wagging finger in the face of an irresponsible student. Governali says. You will be unable to form a committee for this trash. Herschel says, wan as the moon, You might reformulate the title of the thesis so that it sounds more respectable. Culp, who I know has a student working on the history of the typewriter, or is it the lawn mower? is discreetly silent. Is each of you prepared, I say with a ready smile, to have your dissertation topics scrutinized by an impartial jury? Do we need to argue whose can of worms will catch the bigger fish? There’s not a one of us who hasn’t sent a student off to farm some innocent little field so we could harvest its single spud for our own pot.
        This is a pissy poet.
        You said that about Pound.
        Pound is a pissy poet too. He pees with his nose.
        D Annunzio was an important political figure, gents, a writer who was for a time a tyrant, a man who possessed a tyrannical mistress, and a man who was
            befriended by a tyrant. Properly done, it could prove rewarding, this relation— Duse and Duce. Or are you guys offended because the title’s catchy? Shall we dull its shinola so it sounds like shit, as Hershey suggests? Culp giggles a loud false giggle. He may not be on my side, but he’s certainly on his own, and he hates the Manatee as only doggerel can.
              These books, Planmantee says, unwinding his scarf from about his throat at last and coiling it operatically around the tier of tomes in front of him, these books are slime. Shall I read some of the slime you have soiled these pages with? My. I'm surprised. He’s quite worked up. This is strong stuff.
              Your slime is my slime, and my slime is your slime, Culp croons.
              Shut up, you stupid little squirt. I’m sick of living in your childhood.
              Appallment. Absolute. At this pronouncement. What a development. Passion has overcome reason. Which suits me. Culp is now as upright as a column, stiff in every sinew, turning like a soldier at his post to face the door and then stalk stiffly out, the door closing with a slam so vast I thought the glass might have cracked wise as a last retort.
              If Time were a well-mowed field where events were buried and poppies put by them to turn orange in the wind, then, at this place in it, we should erect a memorial column and gothically inscribe it thusly: <©n t|jl8 Sllte llje Se-poctment of Sjlolocy 8M, Sont On fry ft)c Sloplny of to Sitty linen. It should have the shape of a simple cenotaph—I am against the use of D’Annunzio’s foppy face—to celebrate and signify the performance of this wholesale recognition scene and the beginning of the reversal of all our fortunes, not that they were ever much, in fact pitiful if put to scrutiny; however, nothing grandly Greek survives in our time, small men and small minds move mountains with machines, and nudge even nations through the noxious mechanisms of the media. The Age of Lead has in truth arrived, soft-nosed as a bullet, gray as Mao’s gray jacket, heavy as, I have to say, our hearts, though hearts now have meaning only on valentines manufactured by the millions in the Middle West. Why should we not be mediocre men? Culp, a character from the comix, Planmantee, a clothing-store dummy, Governali, some woppy opera’s supernumerary, Herschel, the ordinary soul itself, crushed beneath his own benevolence, incontinent, ashamed now of every human function, and I, who configure them all, who have within myself multitudes of such miserable nobodies (after all, they gave even the camp Jews identifying tattoos, while my inmates are increasingly nameless, numberless as sea salt, as slow as a swamp sogs to assert themselves): failures in the forms and futures of their families, among the poorest exemplars of their professions, losers at love—clowns, wimps, wops, fops, and fatsos—why not die here, at this space on the page, in the cerements of History, in the midst of our wrangling,
      while Professor Planmantee, the righteous, is reading from my first book, Nuremberg Notes, an account of Goering’s demeanor at the Trials, the reading interrupted frequently by cries of “Fascist filth" from him, moans of splenetic boredom from Governali, Herschel's postural shifts from one embarrassed benumbment to another, and Culp’s very noticeable absence, reading on as if the room weren't still ringing, reading in a fake fruity voice, 1 had to think, deriding my use of phrases like "field marshal in mufti," and sneering through the vowels like a skidding car
        Even under such stressful circumstances, even when mouthed by its enemy, some of it sounds pretty good. Nevertheless, 1 interrupt. Nevertheless, I say, none of this is actionable. I know t should have numbered my sentences 1 apologize. The fact is you’ve nothing to fuck now but your fancy socks. I am not to blame for that. Maybe you hate me because, unlike you, I don’t take the measurements of my turds. That’s right. I’m careless. 1 just let them drop. The rest of you shut up. I'm sick of the space you take up in my life. We are one—yes—alike—alas—we are all old farts caught in cast-off pants. I differ from each of you only in one detail: that once in a while 1 take a chance. And I d blow up the world if given it: that wondrous opportunity to even every score. Oh . . . and your losses are nothing like mine. I have written a book I cannot bear to read—that's right, another one on the Nazis, on guilt and innocence, a book I cannot bear to read—though not for the reasons which curdle your tongue, Plan, no, because 1 see slime as our world’s most triumphant
      substance; slowly slime is covering the earth, more of it made every day_
      more whiny people, more filthy thoughts, crummy plans, cruddv things, contemptible actions—multiplying like evil spores (we were told to be fruitful, not to trash the place); so that now there are more artifacts and less art, more that is tame, little that is wild, more people, fewer species, more things, less world, more of the disappointment we all know so well, the defeats which devour us, the hours we spend with our heads buried in our books, blinding our eyes with used up words, while the misspending of our loins leads to more lives and less life—just think (we members of the better species) what divine sparks we might have played at being, and come and gone with spirit; instead, around us, as before, nobodies are killing nobodies for nothing—oh yes, we know it, what failures we all are; but don’t blame me for it, don't take your anger and resentment out on me only because 1 took the villain's part for once and tried to understand him; have you ever thought what the theater of life would be like if there were no villains, or, if villains are so villainous—so hateful, so reprehensible, to be avoided at all cost—why there are so many of them prospering among us; oh, sure, we love to think victim, weep victim, mourn the murdered, pity the robbed, comfort the bereft, while villains get our sym-
           pathy only if their villainy demonstrates how they, poor things, have been victimized; and how we adore the bruises of the beaten, with whom, of course, we identify; but what of the beater’s calluses, the beater’s weary arms? since he, you see, for one brief moment, perhaps, is getting his own back, turning the tables, making a statement, and it says, that statement, it says: now I can produce pain, not merely receive it; now 1 can say I hate you in your helpless ear; now 1 can feel in my fingers the only justice I shall ever know, the vibration of my blows; and now you wish to hang Herr Goering—well, he was no otherwise than you, then—and now you wish to legalize your vicious illegalities—well, 1 tell you, give a Jew a hammer and he’ll break your head, the teeth of every tiger are alike, it’s in the species, it’s deep in our dirty genes, and you read my slime to me in this little trial of wits you have arranged, you read my lines in the finest voice you can find to dislike, you hearsay away at me about the breasts you’d like to lay your own head next to, but the ones you once had in your home and hands have taken their nubbles away, haven't they? and you are left alone with your sizes, and tables, and statistical collections, well, comfort yourself, take pride in your possessions, for your foolish mathematical reductions will still add up to more than the empty warehouse of airy “where-upons" which Governali’s mumbo jumbo’s built; so I think I’ll slam the door myself and see if the sanded glass shatters, but there is no one left to annoy except Herschel, who remains motionless in his chair, in his puddle, in his smell, amid all his farewell symbols; who sat through my tirade while the others shuffled out, sat and pissed in his helpless pants, poor Herschel, the common man’s fan, common, of course, himself, both idol and idolater, the pisser and the pissed upon.
              In the hall of future kings ... the corridors of the academy • . . always a little littered after a day of use, a lot like a cheap hotel, unrugged, or a low-rent office hovel, lined with numbered doors, light wandering without any purpose through the abraded glass, and filled with footfall, the rustle of walkers, and the low murmurs of talk, sounds as muzzy and meandering as the light, the whole effect shabby, seedy in a disarming way, as if the space were saying, “This is a passage where youthful heads, hard on something, pass on their way from text to teacher, with little interest in material things—certainly not in my dirty, once-cream walls, my shoe-soiled floor, or the golden dance of dust in my occasional shafts of sun.”
              A sad space. My eye runs the building, end to end. A space resigned to simple service. Behind the back I ve turned on him, a Herschel. Ailing. I haven’t asked after him, queried his wife. Habit is now his only nurse. I know so little of what I have so peevishly imagined. Like the devil in the guise of a tailor, l scissor their shadows from underfoot where I ve cast them, old play-
       mates of mine. Then I roll their souls up, these silhouettes cut as if the pattern had been razored from the cloth, and, under my arm, I take them down the hall to their domains. Maybe I’ll leave them here and there: some pinned in positions of elocution, one at study, another at rest in his roll, in a drawer, darkness for a buddy, Herschel honey; but possibly I’ll pin Planmantee as you’d pin the tail on a donkey, so that always, anyone idling busily by might see his figure forming figures in the glass, his vague gray shape like the shape of uncertain History, thin as a wraith, capable of frightening a coed’s grasp from the knob she was about to turn, yet a comfort to find there, somewhat eroded, sometimes enlarged, an occasional tear in the tissue, daylight after daylight, as if he were the shade of something, as if he were real.
     AROUND THE HOUSE I sleep alone now. With my
                                         clock. My clock has a tick
                                         wide as its ovaled face. 1 think you might call it a thock. But its thock is soft. Perhaps it thucks. That’s near the noise. And the third hand moves mechanically through every second—jerk—jerk—jerk—jerk—calmly indifferent to the jangle of the clock’s alarm which a fanatical little clapper creates by rapping the hell out of two shiny metal disks mounted on top in the old-fashioned manner, making a noise so obnoxious it might be a call to prayer from a muezzin imprisoned in your head. If its six a.m., I m up. A moment before that, my hand will have been asleep, but at the first outbreak of the bell, with snakelike swiftness, and snakelike venom too, my arm, hand attached, will dart from beneath the sheet to bang a tiny button on its back and force the clock’s face down into a scrabble of table scratches where it will continue to tick without concern.
       I zap the sound so automatically, so swiftly, it scarcely has time for a shriek; consequently I do risk drifting off my map into the land of resleep. Still, I should first savor my efficiency before finding fault with it. Even though I do nod off till nine sometimes. With a fat pillow about the sides of my head, ears as if under feather water, I doze through the waking world’s commotion—the coming and going of Martha and the kids—safe and unalarmed, secure from reality, once I’ve pushed that buffoon of a button. Nonetheless, when I’m lax,
     I m lax only because I m not on duty—which are mornings 1 don’t teach. Although the hour I’ve lost I’ll never miss, 1 get up grumpy and bellyache my way through breakfast. Sometimes I spend an entire day secretly asleep. Normally,
            however, I rest a moment after the alarm has had its say, letting my eyes be lit by the early light, and study the strength of its shine from a safe distance, as it falls on a far wall, for example, in among the trellised arbors which the paper is obliged to repeat, including a faint figure in a pink gown, a parasol held up by hope, a little flagged walk, flowers of no particular species, and one bird, blue, with a solitary silver line trailing from its upraised wing to signify, I suppose, who knows? speedy flight.
              Winter mornings are cold in this big farmy bamhouse. My breath plumes a bit above the pillow. The wide-board floors have not been warmed by the distant radiator because, perversely, it stands under a window so its heat may gladden the out-of-doors and melt the sky. Frost curtains the upper panes. My right bare foot slides slowly downward, trusting in a slipper. 1 haven’t had a thought yet. The cold reentry of consciousness into my covered-up body is brusque and brutal, my cold toe inside a colder scuff is cautious. Once upon a time, Martha and I slept naked, and we were all the flannel one another needed. Now she goes about layered in ghost garb like a contemporary text. However, I and my belly still stand out as bare as all of us were born. My will struggles to contain a dipperful of urine collected overnight in a bladder the chill has shrunk to the size of a walnut. In addition, the draft which comes through the door from the attic stair is steady and can be counted on to be icily unpleasant. An oval rag rug eases the suffering of my soles. Nevertheless, even shod, I can t stand comfortably on grandma’s coil of woolen ropes, however tightly they’ve been braided, and hurry down our upstairs hall, which is lined, as 1 have frequently complained, with massive chests of drawers, to the bathroom, mine alone to enjoy at this dawn hour, and somewhat warmer since it’s one place the radiator’s boiler-heated water reaches. My bowels thank the appropriate god for that, though toilets are famous for their cruelty to the ass they must so often seat. Talk about a draft. I do a double, my head in my hands. It is a habit, not, 1 think, of shame; my face simply serves as a place to put my palms. Out of range of the action.
              1 think it vulgar to groan, sigh, or otherwise celebrate one’s relief. In the army, when we had to shit sometimes in open rows, at troughs like backward animals, it was like listening to the bass section of an orchestra failing to get in tune. Anyway, the natural noises are bad enough without additions, as if the soul were shitting too. Unfortunately, 1 fart a lot.
              Wiping is a big deal. I’d like to say I am orderly and meticulous, but in all honesty I am hurried and slapdash. I usually pull off three sheets and fold them over to make one thick square. After all, to be orderly is anal, and I guess that’s appropriate here. I do insist that the paper be torn from the top of the roll. On those infrequent occasions in which Martha reloads the spool, she invariably
      has it feed from the bottom so the squares are difficult to tear off without unwinding more paper than you want. Do all women prefer to pull up rather than yank down, or just mine? Is it a gender signal, like the way one eats an ear of com, or scrapes the meat from an artichoke leaf, or looks at one’s nails from an open palm? Of course, you’ve got to lean forward to do your bum properly, and reach around at the same time, pressing on into the cave. It’s all very awkward for someone fat as I am, especially when I bend over, which pushes my belly up into my lungs so I can’t breathe. I just make a pass and drop the result in the john as if I d picked up a bug in a glove of Kleenex. Then 1 sit there a minute and think about it, reluctant to go on. In certain cultures, it’s the meditative moment. Three more sections are folded as before; my euphemistic visit is executed with the same motion, but now I push harder, and manage a more vigorous swipe. To drop the wad like something dying was wrappered in it. Sit a second. Another meditative moment. With the third three I rub back and forth, as if I were polishing a car, and sometimes pinch the paper over for a fresh edge. I know there are guys who check the sheets for stains—their shape, their state, and their extent—but I rarely and reluctantly do it. Let loose of number three. Shake cock viciously. Make sure balls hang free. They have a tendency to stick to one s thighs. Sit a second. Through another meditative moment. In which you think what? that ‘moment’ has ‘omen’ in it? Some guys say Bombs away when their turds drop. Some guys flush immediately, but you risk getting your ass splashed. I know other guys study the condition of their stools as if they were tracking an animal. Not me. I hate shit—mine as much as anybody s. So then I ease up, rise. Slowly. On principle, I respect all knees. My balls rise with me. 1 give the toilet lever a smart pull and a quick release. How would a hangman do it?
        I may take no particular interest in my bum, but I do love the rush of water in the bowl, the purely American amount of it, its whirling, cleansing noise, as if one’s ear were being reamed. 1 like getting rid of what I've dung (as Culp is fond of saying), which may seem out of character for an historian. What do we do but spread done deeds on present fields? Don’t we claim to be fertilizing for the future? Certainly we risk infecting our contemporaries with the contagions of the past.
        After my morning shit, I always hope my belly won’t seem as big, but that’s merely a recurrent and always futile wish, dismissed as soon as my tumorous friend looms in the glass, white as M. Dick. Now do 1 go back and put on some underwear and socks or stay here, bare as a baldface, and shave? We’ve no shower. 111 have tubbed before bed to remove my worknight's clay and dust. Despite the cold, 1 stand like something stuffed—me and my mirage—and routinely scratch my stomach as I often do my scalp, stopping only when it’s
            overrun with red lines. I’m getting used to the crisp air, though my balls have crawled from sight—small anyway, scarcely worth remark—so it’s shave; and I start both taps. They run cold as the feel of the floor.
              The medicine chest has a mirrored door. It reflects my reluctant face, which 1 scarcely scrutinize even when I shave. Half of the chest—silly name—is Hers, one quarter of the rest is His. My toothbrush is blue, its bristles frizzed. It leans, head up, in a cracked and cruddy glass alongside Martha’s favorite yellowstemmed dental scrubber and her longer spare. Her spare is the one with the pointed rubber nub on the end of its violet handle—to pick your teeth with, I suppose, massage your gums. I stop to wonder, while I watch the water swirl in the basin, if this paste-caked tumbler is the only thing we share. Terrible temptation to turn it into a symbol. I say to me, Let be. Okay. 1 squeeze some chalky peppermint on my weary bristles, wet both brush and mouth before rubbing the alleged abrasive up and down as I’ve been taught. Still, I am dutiful only in front where it shows. Otherwise, I to-and-fro the backside of my molars in a froth of mouthy suds, my brush banging against my gums—good for ’em—and spattering the mirror—damn—she won’t like that. 1 spit into the sink with satisfying violence. Then, to accompany my first thought (that my intimacy with Martha had been reduced to sharing a tooth glass), I have my first fancy (that the faces of assorted relatives are floating in the cloudy roiling water, now beginning slightly to steam since the warm is finally arriving—about time). In my youth 1 Listerined. Gargled a gorgeful. Blew it out my mouth like I had bitten down on the referent of an expletive. Wasn't it snot green? Zingy so you’d feel sterilized. Now I watch my spat whirl down the drain. Small satisfactions. Satisfactions all the same.
              Rinsing the toothbrush, 1 put it back to work, rushing it around between my teeth like a clown who is putting out a fake fire, and following its passage with a soothing testing tongue. Still feel furry? Basin some spit. Then it’s one more time with the clear water treatment. Hygiene is boring. Twist the cold tap closed. It has a tendency to drip. Wet handed, I soap my face in revolving water that’s at last turning tepid, and hope for the best. Rinse in cold. It’s supposed to be healthy. Well, I don’t want to wear its washer out, but I’ve made that faucet momentarily drip-retardant. Good. Then I won't rinse. I'll shave in soap.
              1 hate shaving. It’s so perpetual. Like caring for a cemetery. Mowing on a schedule. What do they do with all those dead flowers? And the ugly little jars and bottles that vase them? Imagine shaving headstones of their moss. Is that thought my second or my third? Cemeteries are for those meditative moments mom is the omen in. I used to use a goo—a gel? It came out of a tube, too, lathered like whipped cream, and smelled vaguely of vanilla, or wintergreen. But soap does just as well. Except that soap makes small cuts sting. Its suddles fade fast, too, so you don’t know where your razor's been. Soap’s said to leave a film.
      The days first worry. May it be the worst one. Rinse the razor in warm water. Dull as my colleagues but I hate to change the blade. A bit blue as though it had been beaten thin under high heat. Tempered. (Culp wants to come into consciousness, but I resist his pun. Anyway, he s living in High Dudgeon now where 1 feel he should remain.) So scrape away with Gillettes double-edge, making faces in the glass, faces 1II never see: neither mirror nor phiz nor the small spatters of paste. The moles which may herald my cancer have been spotting my skin for decades, changing from red to blue, puffing and fupping as mushrooms do, but I’ll not have noticed. Where I'm not fat, I’m nothing but loose skin. Especially around the eyes. As many whorls as ears. Bubble the cheeks. Who does that? yes, blowfish. It’s my upper lip I always nick. Rinse the face of every trace. What an elemental gesture. Reduced to a rodent, at best, a cat. Puss pawed. The head falls forward toward the porcelain as if it were thinking: sick. Maybe I’ll c°me pbiz to phiz with the ghost of Uncle Balt. HO THERE, YOUNGSTER. Towel dry. Rough nap stimulates the skin. What brought him back? But I’ve always left a bit of soap somewhere, in some suburb like a sideburn, and the nick puts a pink dot on the terry. Stick a piece of toilet paper on it, just a pinch, the merest corner of a square. What it sticks to is the blood. Don't dwell on that. Counted zits when I was a kid. Squeezed pimples of their pus. Entire face looked splotched as if spattered with shame. In the center of the patches, little blood dots. Reminiscent now. So later, when 1 pull the paper off, the cut bleeds again. Don’t dwell on that either. 1 used to sting myself with Aqua Velva. Third thought: vulva. Unshaven shores of. Aqua Velva. You have to cheek it quickly, the alcohol it's mostly made of dries so fast it’s almost gone before you pat it on.
      I can t imagine caring about anything like that now. There was something called unwisely: toilet water. I can't imagine considering its purchase. Like having to ask for Evening in Paris or Seduction in Saigon. Request Trojans from the druggist. What would be more embarrassing: to have to ask for weenie wrappers or a fixative for your false teeth? There were also disappearing creams. Called cold. Pomades too, for greasing the hair. Old days, old ways. Once 1 tweezed my nose of its unseemly growths. Once l tried to train my eyebrows to lie down in a disciplined crescent. Talcs, as well, I used, once upon— Made my face smooth as a powdered doughnut. Now all 1 have is a tired toothbrush and a razor with a doubly blunt blade and a piece of worn green soap the size of a turquoise buckle. Better take a look at the eyes. Bloody awful.
        The soap dish lacks muscle. It resembles a swan within whose hollowed body soap in the shape of a Leda once reclined, looking as though she liked it, at least remaining calm. I always thought the fit should have been the other way round. In any case, Leda was eventually washed up, and her several replacements since have been puny asexual ovals, unattractive to any god.
               I always toss the towel because it distresses her. Martha hates to follow me into the bathroom. She claims 1 chaos it. But I merely shit and shave, as 1 tell her, shave and shit and shut the door, that’s all I do here. Of course, the bath house is her place. She might as well move in. Body shop. Canisters containing perfumed powder. Pads for patting it. Colognes. Oils. Unguents. Essences. Smears for every surface, every orifice, every differentiable part. Bouges, polishes, pastes, jars of creme, pots of tint. Trays of tiny brushes, tweezers, files, cuticle sticks, nail scissors, buffs. Sessions of combing which outlast those of Congress. A mirror wide enough to double up her tits, long enough to check a hem, clear enough to count, what? wrinkles? Her soaks are the length of historical eras. Way back when, she would let me come in and finger her beneath the bubbles.
               Fat has heavied her hips and bastioned her breasts. She resembles a prehistoric fertility figure. Downy blond pubic hair only a little darker than her braids. Godforsaken German Gretchen. I don’t even comb my hair in here, I tell her. She says don’t toss your towel into the tub. I used to leave a ring, but now the ring is damningly dark, too obviously odd, my body or my soap and water have obviously been up to something, so I’m careful to rub it off or smear it with a finger. I drink and 1 eat to excess, and I won’t walk except across cold floors, so if I'm fat it makes sense, I should be fettig; but I have never seen Martha gobble up foodstuffs in unseemly amounts, or hit the bottle very hard, either, she’s unreasonably abstemious, and I can’t imagine that the absorption of bath oils leads to a significant increase, so where is this enlargement coming from? My day’s first reverie: Martha’s figure. Something to hold on to now that I’m not allowed. Mammaries in memory invade my meditative moment. 1 leave the bathroom wearing slippers and a flake of snowy tissue not this time on my chin. I used to use a styptic pencil. My lip does bleed again.
               She doesn’t like me to walk around the house naked, not because the sight of me will bruise innocent boyish eyes, or because she finds any such globular glimpses offensive, but because she has become a prude. Vain, she perfumes her body like a whore. What for, I wonder, but I cannot find the time for suspicion. The woman she was she will never be again: warm, lively, open, loud, a little lascivious in the early days, somewhat inventive, a good though reluctant cook, companion to my ideas, submissive to my moods; now distant, faint and irregular, unreal, wavy like a mirage, large, but mostly out of sight, a Moby, I decide, like the white whale, often submerged, like my belly beneath a coat. I used to use her like I use the john. At least, now, that’s what she claims. Humpff. How does she know how I use the john? Maybe I take it for a joyride. Maybe I make of it a meditative moment. Well, what to wear? What’s clean? Hell. What’s handy?
        1 enter my clothes by ducking my head and pushing at whatever flaps open the way Arabs enter tents. A pair of chino trousers. This is not a school day. I don’t have to dress. Porch gray for a porch-gray day. No protection from the cold, though. Not the best choice. Hey, what’s going on in this head here, Henry? I call myself Henry, on occasion, when 1 want to be on joking terms with myself. What’s up, Henry? you never debate, guy, you just wear. Well, what? My first unaccountable confusion of the day. 1 pick an old tweed trouser, a woolly woodman's shirt, both family friends. After all, it’s chilly in my study. This closet is like a dream of my childhood, big enough to camp in. A row of old clothes runs along the two wide sides. The poles have sagged so the hangers tend to slide to the center, increasing every tendency to bow. Some of these rags have been around for an age, and they feel as strange to me as if they’d been worn by a relative not recently deceased. Martha’s purchases, mostly. Back when she dressed me like a doll. Now 1 even do my own laundry. Many of my shirts are speckled with bleach spots as if they d been worn in a storm. Here’s a tree of ties. When did our tastes diverge? When our mothers no longer met? Another thought, another theory. Soft as a billow her bosoms were. These ties could tail a kite. Tourniquet a cut. I cook. I clean. What mischance brought this silk joke to the front of the tumble, the gaudy one that’s always good for a laugh? Its a tie designed to look like a long mostly orange fish. It hangs head down in the direction of the dick. What did 1 give Culp to get even? But 1 never learned to iron. One day I dream, I’ll be rid of all this—this life ol . , . this treaty 1 signed . . . this treaty of Versigh—and then I’ll press my own pants, too. Or wear what I want till my want falls off. 1 need to put on some socks. Woolly warming ones. World as cold as a witch’s clit. Hole in heel. Not very big, though. Never show. In the same dresser drawer, handkerchiefs, underwear, socks. I used to wear cufflinks, two-toned shoes sometimes, or shoes with a summer weave. A white silk scarf with a silk string fringe. Still have its flat white box if 1 no longer own the scarf. My god, was that box really for my leather gloves? Hard to believe. One day I’ll darn my own hose. One day I’ll be rid. Yeah, sure. I’ll do the dance. Of ... In my BVDs.
        I wonder what it would be like to fuck Martha again. Not much fun. But how about the circumstances? conceive a scenario. No way. Beat her up and then jump her. 1 can’t think why. Then why am I still so pissed?
        Here we go into the pants at last. Like putting your leg in the flue of an old stove. Don’t tell me the zipper’s broken. 1 like to dress like I shit: without thinking. My bedroom windows are covered with frost. Like 1 told Martha, no need to shade ’em. Midwestern winters. If there are cold snaps, these are cold gnaws. What are they good for? these deeps of freeze? Well, they kill lots of beetles, bees, little bugs, and flies. There are several caught between storm and
             summer windows which will buzz back to life you can bet in the spring when you want to let the outdoors in and get those flies in your face, instead—a bother before you feel the breeze. I’m all thumbs when it comes to buttons. Never could get bras unhooked either. Confesses Failure Concerning Certain
             Essentials. Elsewhere in the window a broken sash cord dries. Its frayed end curls in the cold.
               Killing frost. I hadn’t realized. Of course. Nature kills off tons of its living citizens hourly so others may arrive. What number for this thought? Those who oppose birth control should suicide at sixty. Got to make room at one end or the other.
               Bloody belt. I only have one and it’s always missing. Has a permanent curve in it like a wide bend to a road. When I get home from school, I simply slip it out of its loops and let it drop. Each time somewhere different. To signify my release from the constraints of society. Well, today is not a teach day so I can do without. Stare in there. Wonder what it’s like to wear a sanitary. Fill my pockets from the dresser: keys, coins, list of needed digging supplies, wrist-watch—since the strap’s been broken these many weeks, it rides in my pants— billfold, pillbox, pen. Comb. Stare in there. I should comb the bed. It isn’t made either. The mirror features the bed. The tumbled comforter and sheets. My head merely intervenes. I run the comb, the end with wide teeth, in short strokes briefly around the back, and then, in longer forward ones, briefly toward my brow. We made the bed together in the morning. We were big on doing things together: shopping and browsing, eating in, listening to records, reading different books but under the same light, attending concerts, straightening up, painting and repairing, cooking, dressing as well, bathing too sometimes, sliding around in the suds, gardening certainly, taking a drive, sure, bedding down, you bet, fooling around. I on one side, Martha on the other, we pulled the covers straight, plumped the pillows, smoothed a bump or rumple out. Neat nest. Now I pull my sole side up. Like living in one leg. God how I hate it. I’m used to it. Don't mind. My hair is not hard to part. Stare in there.
             I work with the narrow end of the comb. Pat flat. Catch sight of my eyes. Bloody awful.
               Shall I slip into some shoes or stay in slippers? Day like this. I study whats out. We’ve a big garage behind us, a real car barn. Its tarpaper roof looks sleety. There’s a glaze to the hedge, and a frozen droop to every twig. A sort of gray in the grass. A hare limped trembling over the—oer the— And Keats was just a kid. To think I wanted to be a poet when I grew up, and then my high school English teacher said, Poets are Peter Pans, they don’t grow up. What did she know? but I didn’t know that. I wanted to grow out of where I was the worst way. Growing up seemed to be the best method. Maybe she meant they didn’t
      age. Hell, everything ages. Why else have history? I love windows. Here are two hateful ones. They put the sky in a coma. Okay. Maybe I’ll overspread the quilt. Cover my guilty night s sleep. Anyway, I’ll stay in my slippers.
         The front stairs in this house are pretty wide, even though the landing's been narrowed by Martha s row of mahogany mastodons. The steps are a bit slick, however, because we couldn’t bear to cover the fine pine with rubber treads. I guard my descent, gripping the elegant banister. The word slipper’ here is a warning. It is my favorite moment—my meditative me mo—at the head of the morning stairs, those bureaus like bad dreams behind me, looking down at the houses handsome entry, the wide sidelights, the large imposing door, its Georgian arch of window, pale wood and paper everywhere, letting the light have its natural happiness, the great square openings off the hall to living room and parlor undoing the space like a present, and the grand stairs widening as you reach their bottom as though they were the end of a regal cloak. Unfortunately, in comparison, the rest of the house feels pinched. There are too many large closets in little rooms. Spaciousness has been stored in these itty-bitty cupboards like eggs in their mush-paper cartons. It’s as if the architect planned expansively at first, and then ran out of conception. So sometimes, on light-fine mornings, 1 simply pivot on the final stair and go back up again. That way I make a day with two dawnings, not bad for somebody who outdid Keats at getting gray, and grew stout in every poet’s company.
         Coffee comes first. It's only six-fifteen or so, six-twenty. That means I can have breakfast in peace 1 have counted on it. I get cross when my routines become irregular. A condition more disagreeable than bowel block or the drizzly shits. 1 start the cold water running. That clears these old pipes. However, the hot is full of rust and takes time to flush. The water looks like orangeade. So I shall boil the grounds in cool clear eggshelled water. Water shouldn’t have a past. My customary ways are like a favorite sweater. Even a bad habit is a better friend than an unreliable virtue. Motto for the month. I measure out the beans, which are stored in an ugh-green tin canister unfortunately marked in kitschy calligraphy. The grinder is, however, an honest antique and puts the coffee through a course in history which enhances its flavor, I believe, almost infinitely. I turn the crank vigorously. It squeaks once every round. And keeps better time than the kitchen clock. You can infer from the feel of the crank, and the sound of the grind, how fresh the beans are. These are. A wide window graces the sink. Work-see spaces are to be preferred. These are. They provide a view like the view from my bedroom, only one floor lower: there’s nowhere a bird in the ice-colored sky; amazing, up there, there should be stars; the doors of the garage are obviously drawn together by the cold as much as clenched there by the hasp; and the gravel of the drive has been magnified so
            all 1 see is yards of stony shards. In a quarrel between nature and machine, 1 suppose, the larger ones were pulverized. 1 check the coffee, draw the drawer forth. The grind is in fine fettle. Good. Did 1 think quarrel? I meant quarry. Hammers hunting down runaway rocks. I must remember to wonder out loud if the cat will ever come back. My measured water is nearing the end of its troubles. Good. Shall I heat biscuits, fry eggs, sizzle bacon, or perform French toast? Beautiful questions. Coffee grinding creates one kind of calming quiet, boiling water makes for another; the sink and cabinets, pans on counters, gleam in a blue light borrowed from out-of-doors; the radiators will soon clank like friendly ghosts and cut the chill. I’d better wake up the furnace. Not yet. Not yet. I hate the basement in the mornings. It’s for nightwork. For the burial of bad days. Do we have an orange? Good. 1 like cutting grapefruit, lemons, oranges in half. Neither onions nor potatoes offer themselves to halving, open like shells to such a virginal show of their bodies. Best shape in nature is possessed by a halved pear. O-range. Nice word. Crushing the pulp is satisfying as well, the rind cupped in your harsh unrelenting hand, rubbing, rounding its tart insides into a puddle of juice as though you were liquefying the color. Grind. Crush. Cut. Squeeze. The verbs of the kitchen. Boil. Brew. Slice. Cube. Bake. Roast. Fry. Gut’s cabulary. Simmer. Steam. Grill. Stew. Cooking uses cruelty to reach its grace.
               And then we bite, chew, swallow, emulsify, absorb, shit. But it’s a good life— right?—nevertheless.
               Snare a lark. Twist its neck. Pluck its feathers. Skip evisceration which might be normal in a larger bird. Baste its body. Brown its skin. Pull away the wings with your fingers, rend the legs, with your teeth tear its flesh. Proceed slowly. Easy licking does the gravy. Suck the bones. These birds offer such small swallows. Do have several. Succulent bits, each bite. Good death. Right life.
               Lots of sounds are like prolonged grates of static. I think I’m beginning to overthink. Normally never before seven. These are annoying, distracting, chalk squeaks, these overthought thoughts. It’s like humming to yourself. Filling the head with the tootles of a dance band. I’ve discovered that I can continue to talk to myself while silently playing a tune. The psyche like a bar filled with background music. What to make of such a skill, a skill which I presume everybody has? The little muscle-moves which make unspoken words cannot be the same moves or muscles which make the music. Is that worth remembering? Of course there are sounds which are nerve-racking. And sounds which are scary. Sounds which hold out promise. Sounds of sexual fulfillment, mostly fake. I hum former hits, obsessively repeating each one until I’ve worn it out. d/Aie t/iuMe,<jpoe& nound cvnd 'pound, oA oA oAvoA, and vt c<ynve& out Avene. Then, to ward off terror, I singsong another through the cemetery of the self.
      So systematically abused—these worn-out melodies and weary lyrics—1 trust they will never return.    xuA in, (A# Mwuet. That sort of thing. SWda/di/Umn
      wAui/turna c/iew. Kitchen sounds are often of the kinder kind. For real repose, though, we don’t want actual silence. We want calm noises, reassuring crickets, yes, john flush, (Atefu/ten-flatten o^/Aie mm on (Aie certainly the coffee grinder, 1 remember the low slow creak of grandma’s rocker, and the porch swing, soothing as birdsong.
         One orange will do to gullet my pill. Which is where? In pocket. Remembered this time. Self-congratulation No. i. The garbage sack beneath the sink is full. Does she know what it is to empty anything? to shut a door? close a drawer? put a cap back? get a toilet roll on right? Rinse this knife, just the blade. 1 am neat about the knives. I mean they make me behave. Coffee is the coalescence of its odor, dark nosed as a nigger girl, warm and reliant, warming the cup which warms the hands which offer it to the knowing inhale of the . . . oh well. Perhaps a fry of toast in a sweat of egg. With a dollop of maple and another of butter. Sounds good. Wouldn't it be wonderful if breakfast were immediately followed by bed? Yes. Breakfast and Bed instead of Bed and Breakfast. The New World Order.
         Breakfast in bed is no fun at all. Raisins pop from buns and hide in the sheets so later you can roll upon them. During a dreadful dream you were cursed with the incontinence of the rabbit and now, on waking, you know what such a curse means. Eating off your knees is not nice. The knees make for total teeter unless you have one of those footed trays which make you feel you’re in a hospital. Some people pile things on their beds: bunnies, clothes, bolsters, cats, books, small dogs, magazines, briefcases, newspapers, purses, umbrellas. Martha likes to sleep in the middle of her comforts, eat there, read there, hold court, cosset a cold, pet the cat, everything but fuck. I’ve chosen my fry pan. Midsize. Enameled iron. The bread has to be cut to the correct width. I have an aversion to Holsum Bunny Wonder. One day old is fine for frying. A little cream, a little egg, a little butter, dash of vanilla. What I like best—maybe what 1 like best in any average day—is the moment when the knife begins to cut into the crust: you are holding the loaf, of course, so that hand is happy; there is a satisfying sawing sound; the blade’s bright metallic bite says fresh; you can almost feel that same crunch beneath your teeth; crumbs fly about like bread sparks; and the board is covered in soft dust as if a piece of timber had been milled. With each saw, more of the bread’s essence is released to modify the fragrance of the coffee. No sir. Morning kitchen cannot be surpassed. Better for the soul than Mass.
         I love jam jars and their labels. 1 love the expression                  . 1
      love the haze on knives which have been spreading butter a moment before
             you looked at them, or a teaspoon whose bowl is still damp with cream-colored coffee, a plate with a peel of rind on it, and a vase with a single flower, leaning to listen. These things are signs of peace. Perhaps it is after all good to be alive. Certainly it is good to be alone. Peace has that price. Burning bread crumb in the toaster, its filament of smoke. Nice. Small sausages still in links. Bowl of berries. Red razz is best. The cream fills the little crimps between each blister, the sugar softens into a pale gray gritty paste, and the spoon’s face is always pretty. Oh well. I harvest the toast. A meadow of soft gold grained with brown, the syrup another version of honey, a warmly liquid light living inside it, languidly soaking into the tawny untroubled surface of each slice and easing its soothing sweetness over the edges of the bread. Ah. Well. Who could crudely call this simply food? It waits the fork like a lover awaits a lover.
               The secret of life is paying absolute attention to what is going on. The enemy of life is distraction. If you’re not present in the present, where the hell are you? Word of Wisdom No. i.
               Curious. We don’t say ‘break,’ which might remind us of the meaning, we say ‘brek.’ ‘Bedfast’ doesn't mean to forsake sex or sleep quick. ‘Break bread’ means to share, to partake. But bread rarely breaks, unless perhaps a rusk does, zwieback, no, bread mostly tears, comes apart in hunks unless it’s cut. So, since language never lies, what I'm talking to myself about is a kind of cracker. Matzo. Mideast version of the staff, no, stuff of life. But to break a fast means you intend to return to it. The break can’t be bigger than the hose. Mom's omen is ominous. I never enjoy my dictionary phase. There's a little lake of syrup 1 need to slob up. Last bitty bite. Then lick the itty of it. Fast is funny: quick, firm, abstemious, racy. The swipe from my last bite of bread leaves a pleasant swirl on the plate. Suppose you glazed over such traces. To create the Dirty Dish pattern. Open Stock on Soiled Surface by Royal Copenhagen. And how about the fork’s final reflective pull through the mouth, the tines mapled together. Shame to wash up and lose those friendly smears. Sugar does okay, but grease doesn’t grow old gracefully. Thought for the day. Clean up, redd up, pick up, fix up, freshen up, tool up. We wash down elephants, don’t we? We hose down cars. So what? Down is dirty. No doubt about. Whereas the second cup is a contemplative moment. Fading flowers are the best dressed. Suitable to a table with crumbs on its cloth. Better than tea leaves for fortune-telling. The fate of the household. Future of the family. The waiter with a silver knife scrapes the crumbs swiftly onto a silver tray: croissant flakes, muffin crumbles, toast dust. Just a little, thanks, to warm the cockle. And then God said, Now that we have some light, let there be breakfast table.
               A squirt of liquid soap will do the trick. I let the pan and dishes soak in the sink. The soap is snot-green too. No getting away from it. So is the sea, JJ said,
      but only off Ireland. Better stoke the furnace into a storm of Sturm und stress of Drang. Down narrow stairs that are damn dark even with a light on. Looking for clues I may have carelessly lazily wearily left last night, 1 make my way past washtubs and storage shelves, beyond the old furnace to the new. Wish we had a proper thermostat. To wake the warm like my alarm. Someday they'll have sensors in every room. Sensors in every pocket, not counting the penis. Pound the thing into action. Eye a gauge. Pretend for a moment I’m a submarine captain. But I’m always pretending. That’s what keeps me sane. If the forward tubes are ready then fire the forward tubes, you fool. Cool down here. Smell of fresh earth. That’s bad. Will probably dissipate during the day. We all do. Call up the pipes to the conning tower. What does the surface of the sea say? It says there will always be waves, and the ocean will always be empty.
         Now 1 dawdle about downstairs, gazing out all of its windows. Martha says I have no clutter detector. I see, I say, what I want to see, note what I want to note, like the rest of the self-absorbed human race. The sky seems made of milk glass. It is pleasant to pass through these rooms without any purpose, to wander so pointlesslv the least little thing acts like a magnet, drawing the eye first, then the head, next legs, and shortly the outstretched hand . . The advantages of being in advance of the family are not to be underestimated. I used to read the papers at breakfast. It became a protection against Martha, who was in her rail-at-me stage. I have never done anything right in my life. That is the doctrine, handed down from daddy. Even if I write a book, it’s not a good one; if I earn a promotion, it didn't come soon enough; if I receive a raise, it nevertheless doesn’t amount to much, and certainly doesn’t match Governali’s or Plan-mantees pay increase, which was immense, astronomical, in any case greater than mine. How does she know, 1 wonder. She knows. The walls of the world are covered with common knowledge, but will I pay attention, take a look? Hearts are everywhere open books. Yet 1 wait for fogs. Doors to shut. Darkness to fall. Generous credit, easy terms: why can I not accept them? Why am I rinsing the silver in cold water? Why am I shoveling the walk with a shovel meant for coal? Why am I wearing that shirt with those pants? What possessed me to put on that fishful tie? Why, dear, to lie about the length of my cod. I cut the bread too thick, the grapefruit unevenly, I oversalt what 1 don’t overpepper, the coffee 1 burn or brew too strong, on the car I never have the brakes fixed, she has had to take over the payment of our bills, make calls, get results. What else?
         On one side of us, there’s the Factor house, reasonably close. I like to joke that the Factors are not a factor. I like that kind of thin pun. Actually, I like the act of liking, itself, though my colleagues would probably deny it. Well, the Factors are not a factor. I like to call them Mister, Missus, and Missy Max.
      I like to let leaf smoke blow into their yard. Even their dog doesn’t bark. Their
           wan pale faces are at none of their many windows. These are shaded. Their house might as well be a mountain. Still I examine its narrow boards with interest compounded daily. The Factor house is on our parlor side, and every morning I pull the drapes wide to open their closed home to my prying eye. It drives Marty-the-MyTm-Shy drizzy, who closes shutters, pulls blinds, draws shades, and wonders why her plants die. The Factors’ clapboards come together quickly like genuine applause. So I know where their eaves sag, gutters leak, where the slate has slid on their roof. Martha says sure, but you don’t know about our rusts and rots and scalings, conditions which are yours alone to track and take care of, she claims: eaves, gutters, downspouts, shingles, drains—you name it, you’ve got a hole in it, clog in it, something cracked, something broken, something loose. Hey, 1 say, 1 can’t see the inside of my hat. You don’t wear a hat. Porkpie. When, Whiffle? Well, how about the middle of my back? Should 1 know that? She carries her scorn into another room. Though 1 know what’s what with the garage; I know how it stands within its visible yard, and where the rake leans, long past the hour of its leaves; 1 know the rubbled look of our gravel drive as its pulver passes the house—hard on tires, day like this. Anyway drains are supposed to leak before they clog. That’s what they do to provide plumbers a living. And a funny thing. The Factors’ shades are all a little different: a different color, a different condition, a different cut. And they are all drawn a different distance down. Perhaps on purpose? Something to ponder. She poohs. From an increasing distance. Okay. What to do? Protect myself. First I put a paper between us to serve as a shade, a shutter, a blind. Push the sports page in her face. Then bore her with business. The columns of opinion. So she won’t want to read the versa of my vice. I must say that tactic didn’t seem to discontent her. Or slow her much either. In the general climate of incompetence I provided, she didn’t need to fault-find. Consequently, after a time, I began getting up ahead, and going to bed behind. The Factors haven’t shifted a shade for a decade. That fact, 1 bet, they don’t realize themselves. It means, Martha, that they have absolutely no curiosity about us, and are certainly not inviting ours. We should, I think, be insulted, I tell her, and she is. Not to give a peek, never to throw a glance in our direction, part a curtain, give a hoot. They are so indifferent they have given up that side of the world. I know what sill the sparrows will try to wedge a nest on. But they . . .
             . . . couldn’t care less.
             The parlor is a perfect parlor, Martha has seen to that. It contains a small piano, although neither of us plays. She bought old sheet music to stock the piano bench, since the bench, black as lacquer, has a lid beneath which scores are clearly supposed to be stored. There is a piece of Victorian overstuffing—
       a half-a-length sofa like the winning margin of a horse—and two hassocks covered with needlework, armchairs and chair backs protected by antimacassars, a drum-shaped side table under the window, lace curtains so wholly the real thing they are returning to string, then an easel on flamingo-like legs, thin and knobby, now used to display an oval photo of wild Indians pasted on thick creamy stock and long out of its oval frame. This morning I'm magnetized, and inspect it. Done in a sort of sepia. Three Indians in full rattledress are looking stiffly at one another. Their eyes, 1 notice for the first time, are incredibly calm, or is it astonishingly empty? Yes, there—there is the rattle. One Indian is also holding a very small drum. As if he had forgotten he had a hand. Suddenly I think of another picture, another wall, then of Lou, and it shakes what used to be my soul to what used to be its roots. When this you see, dismember me. Here we have a meaningless moment no doubt, memorialized by the camera, and now placed in this small unvisited museyroom where time lies in a stagnancy of nothing to report, and a snot-green film blown from the nose of James Joyce has hankied about its holy gloom. Martha keeps the place dusted, but I still sneeze. It’s as if a little fish had jumped.
          Fetch my watch from its thighside pocket. If my big clock thucks, this one whiskers. There’s time for a third cup. Just. If I dawdle too long 1 may run into one of the kids or overhear Martha nagging them into their school selves. They are big enough now we could happily do without them. A meditative cup’s length—that many minutes. It’s the best of the day in lots of ways, not as aromatic as the first, nor as needed, but it is special precisely because it is so redundant, and colors one’s mood with the friendly climate of caffeine: a feebly basic bitter crystalline compound that occurs in coffee, tea, mate, guarana, and kola nuts. I don’t particularly enjoy the dictionary style. Admittedly, it has its merits. I’ve figured out that when 1 begin to play with words—take them apart like ‘breakfast’ and make my own microchasm, compare them to their bedfast cousins, revolve them or doodle them dipsy, like fast break or break wind, wind down or downcast; if I anagram them out of recognition; if I fix my mind on their precise definitions, snuffle out their etymologies, pun on them, rhyme with
       them,  riff, and generally foddle them to fits—then something about their wordless counterpart has made me nervous, anxious, reluctant, so I spell my way out of the referent’s presence, manage the moment by managing its sign; but, oddly,
       then,  just that disinvolvement frees me to find the truth, the solution, the what? in the history of meaning, to see a fast as a whole loaf, to understand that when l break a fast I’m momentarily sharing a rare affirmation in a life of relatively continuous monastic denial (breakchaste could be where one stores a dinette set), that, in fact, I’m eating my abstinence; that to break is not merely to interrupt or bust but to place in pieces something that was once one, and then to re-
           verse the orientation of the fragments: eat, and bits of the matzo disappear; eat, and you are no longer in a state of refusal; eat, and unless you were fasting while you slept (possibly in a dream), you broke nothing when you fried your bread; better call what you had petit dejeuner substantiel, and play it safe.
              1 sniff the hot surface first—have to—and sip a cooler edge, swallow the more moderate middle, gulp the last, tip the cup up, form a chain with dip, with nip, with pip, even gyp, all small—seeds, portions, losses—except, damn, rip, but each one represents a take-away, a removal of some sort, something torn or bitten, except, damn, zip, and, damn, kip, which is a wallet, isn’t it? then what does one do with the body parts, hip, lip? a bip is a little—no that’s blip, shit. So’s a snip, a clip, a snit.
              Hey wait. Rethink. Lip is an edge which doesnt know width; a zip is fast since the syllable is short; kip, come to think of it, besides being a bawdy house, is a quick grab, like cop a feel, or nab a crook, or bag a meal, and rip is a quick tear: i.e., all agree on brevity in space or time, yes, that is the soul of it, and tells us just how hip a hippie is.
              It’s time—the moving w'hisker tells me—to hide inside my work, which is, of course, a fortress also made of language: the castle of what comes between commas. It is not difficult to rinse the soaked plate of its syrup or the soaked pan of its butter. Sweep away all trace of toasty pleasure. I may be the only man who ever waxed sentimental over a dirty dish. Scrub the film from my table knife with the fingers, clear the tines of the fork, direct a faucet stream like a sluice between them, drench the cup, too, save a swipe for the saucer. I stack them neatly in the dish rack, not to dry, but as a sign to Martha that I’m up, about, ahead of her, and as a demonstration that I’ve done my duty, cleaned up after myself, removed the history of my early morning from her world.
              1 haven't heard a bird. It’s that cold.
              On the unfactored side of our house is a lot full of weedy trees, untended to the point of resemblance to my study. Martha claims Nature has mimicked my mess of books and papers, letters and manuscripts, pamphlets and coffee cups, and it's the sedulous ape next door which has persuaded me that chaos is an order. I think it’s curious that there are so few 'pam' words in English. Even the ones we have depend on the pampas. After pamper, there’s what? My Culpish character doesn’t hesitate. It knows.
                              I once went to bed with a nun, whose hungers were second to none.
                                   Said she, It’s outrageous, but I'm so pamphageous,
                                I’ll dine on your cock if it’s done.
          Why should pa- like -n but not -m? An Indian tribe. Some secret locked in this. As Magus Tabor always said: There is an insufficient reason for everything. 1 sometimes tiptoe about in my jungly side lot—you can hardly walk there—and observe the thicket-loving birds, the thrasher, and the vireos, shy, ah . . . and olivaceous . . . what a word! oAc <£ o/ova, yes, I remember . . . small, quick, like mice amid the twigs. High gray grass now flat with frost. Its own microcosm.
          Martha believes in mice. The purpose of order is to deprive mice of their natural habitat. Mice and roaches know when anything is out of place, when anything has been left over, postponed, say, to the next day, as so much in my life is, and they skitter to it, whether it is a little pile of pencil shavings or a bit of crumbled cheddar, a slide of unanswered letters, undone duties, or a tangle of angry grasses, they dart to it, soon are washing their antennae, their whiskers, preparing to settle in, to soil neglected spaces with their attentive presence, nibble at my pile of ungraded exams, make their nests among castoff notions. This principle does not apply to large things. If, for example, I left redwoods untended, pyramids to gather dust, they wouldn’t thereby draw ants, mice, or flies; neither do abandoned parking lots, by themselves, nor, I must say, her store of furniture and other giant follies. There are worms tunneling through the dirt in her drawers which she doesn’t know about. Perhaps the day’s first fully pleasant thought.
          I keep my study door closed because Martha can’t stand to see inside. And I can't stand to see her seeing inside either. My world of the untouched, once touched. My land of the freed. I point out that, contrary to popular opinion, I cannot be a Fascist and tolerate the sort of disorder she, a menopause liberal, cannot stand herself. 1 am, I say, in actuality, the lonely voice of reason. Martha lolls her tongue out. Makes her throw-up sound. She’s sick or she’s just been hung. Her declared opinion: the voice of reason has laryngitis. It’s true I live in a tumble. Used to slide sideways to my desk. But my form has infilled and my booktowers have topped out, now both of us lean, are tilted and teetery. I said I am the lonely voice of freedom. Martha lolls her tongue out. Makes her throw-up noise. I make a guess: panting dog? dog about to be sick? dog with a mouth that’s too small? Let me explain you to you, she says; what you honestly are is a dealist, a topian. You want a world that perfectly meets your nutty specifications, and when it doesn’t, you say fuck it. If you can’t enjoy your world order, pantheon perfect, every bust in place and done by Donatello, every bird’s song a panegyric, you will settle on bric-a-brac instead, and want nothing better than trailer parks, cycle gangs, and total confusion. If you can't have King Reason and all his rational kin ruling absolutely in your realm, you’ll have the random and its rascals. It’s fun to have a wife who’s so amusing. There’s dirt in your drawers, dearie, I don’t say, if you ever thought to look.
            It occurs to me, suddenly, staring at my keys, considering how their arms leap up and how their formed fists strike the page, that every line has been made by a blow, is a row of bruises, a record of attack—thwack—flurry of lefts—tack—ticktick—tack—another shot to the head—thwack—thump to the mid—thumb to the I—brief pause for the bob and weave of thought—bore in again—rattack tickclack—gun them one after one so they die on the page, with only a trace of the rage that did them down . . . Exactly like the way 1 flatten my morning clock. So it says thuck to the tabletop. 1 am about to lose what just this moment occurred to me . . . what occurred to me? ... it occurs to me that possibly 1 shall go on showing my movies on these sheets only so long as I continue to have two concealing pages of G & 1 they can slip between when the show’s over. So far I have placed the pages face to face, in the missionary position, boy page on girl page. Sexing these sheets is not easy. Besides, there are two of Guilt for every one of this sort here, on top and bottom like Lucky Pierre. So G & Is a “they” page, this one a "me"—scarcely a maiden. What have “they” and “me” to say to each other, outside of no for yes and yes for no? How far have the "me” pages gotten now in Guilt and Innocence? late in the bloody business? Let's see ... I'm infiltrating the chapter entitled “The Lessons of the Fiihrer.” Chapter Nine. Here I endeavor to understand Hitler as a kind of Antichrist. That is, had there been a Christ crucified; had there been a goat, ancient as its Age, driven from a village bearing all its inhabitants’ sins like bad smells with him; had there been: then the Fiihrer would be the smelly goat coming back again, loaded with the whole of hell, to reenact the sacrifice in the other direction, and not just to get even with the Jews, to judge the entire town at last, to replace every crime like a white-hot crown, but to crucify without the least sign of an ameliorating salvation. Sin kills. Sure as shooting. Of course kindness kills. The cliche says so. Hate kills And Love is Death. Nothing more echt. No matter what you do or how you live, whether you are good, bad, or indifferently dull, you die. That’s the master race's Message. Skulls on caps, shoulder patches, buttons, at the end of batons. Death owns everything, especially our souls, source of the foulness we smelled when we tried to drive the Doggod's goat out. So the Fiihrer unintentionally teaches: 1
                            1. That Mankind is not redeemable.
                            Perfection is impossible. Utopias are foolish. All projects must be undertaken with the understanding that human flaws are likely to undo them. The notion that mankind is morally improvable is as silly a superstition and as lacking in any evidence as the belief in the supernatural. The only enemy of man is man.
          This is lesson one and its summation. Who is more convincing, the son of a God who is a fiction made into history, or the son of Satan who is history made from a fiction? Well, class, when you look inside yourself, do you really find there the divine spark? or Revelation's Beast? On which side does the evidence fall? What does History teach?
          I'll tell you why I believe in the Fiihrer. Because 1 trust in what he inadvertently taught. No sagely able leader he. But I believe in the lesson of the catastrophe he brought, like spit to polish up our thought, like starch to stiffen our feeble wit with a little terror. The kindest thing people call me is a pessimist. But I am not. I believe that the Teutonic bearer of the truth will be more enduring than the Jewish turncoat who bore only falsehood and hypocrisy. After all, kids, we are not supposed to worship the bodies of these prophets, nor their biographies, nothing sacred about them: the body that burned as reluctantly as a cabbage or the body that cried out that it had been forsaken, understanding at last how it had been duped into dying; no, only the meaning of their brief sojourn among us can be considered divine. Take your choice. There ain't no Mister Inbetween.
          Sure, Adolf Hitler knew how to play the piano (badly), how to type (slowly), how to drive a car (erratically), how to draw (inadequately), how to write (drivel), how to remember (photographically), and how to bombast (beautifully). But bombast isn’t bombing. He was in fact a petty little twerp. A man of such meager means he could only wish the way the weasel wishes it were a looker like the tiger and a lord like the lion. What 1 wonder about are all of those who weren’t twerps who willed what Hitler wished, who pondered and planned and organized and sacrificed in order to establish the thousand-year Reich, who donned uniforms and fired guns and made planes and prepared food and forged those famous chains of command, who invented and connived and lied and stole and killed, because they willed what the little twerp wished; they, who idolized a loud doll, who loved the twerps-truths, who carried out the wishes of a murderous fool, an ignoble nobody, a failure so unimportant that failure seems a fulsome description of him.
          Revisionists will try to make Hitler out to be a cunning fellow. They will argue that vegetarians are not necessarily sentimental cranks. They will end by calling him a sagely able leader. This will remove some of the guilt from the German people and place more of it upon the head goat. Doers of deeds of darkness will blame their unfavorable reputation on the slow arrival of dawn, sinners guilty of any actual execution will say the seeds lay in someone else’s thought. When the prophets enlarged the scope of the Law to include intentions and desires as well as acts, they made everyone into a lawbreaker, as St. Paul immediately observed; however, they also took some of the heat off perpetrators.
             Are you saying, Herschel wonders, that the signers of death warrants are not responsible, or are less responsible, than the officer who cries "Fire!” and he possibly less responsible than those in the squad? I am not agreeing to any such formulation, no, Herschel. But I am suggesting that another liberal piety may be, perhaps, not so saintly as it seems. You often hear the argument, concerning so-called death at a distance, for example, that the rifleman who’s half a mile away, or the bomber at ten thousand feet, or the bureaucrat at two hundred miles, is able to kill more readily because of the remoteness of the consequences and their lack of horrid reality; whereas the killer who stabs his victim at least sees the agony of his action and has actual blood on his hand. To which l answer, precisely. The signer of the warrant is supposed to be cowardly, afraid to do the dirty job himself, hiding his crimes from his own eyes. I say he is cleverer, and more civilized: he doesn’t like killing people, so he gets someone else to do it for him—someone who doesn’t mind as much as he, someone who likes it, revels in it, finds his reason for being in being such a ready agent of non-being. Let me put it this way: one, the butcher, has willed his victim’s death, and done it; the other, the judge, has willed a condition: the removal of some poor X from the land of the living, the erasure of a name from the register of the real. It is enough for the magistrate that certain words be true, and while these words, implemented by the acts of others, may have been the cause of hill-high heaps of corpses, do we really want to say that the man who signs his name is more monstrous than the executioners? that the typist has no blame? that those who built the gallows or invented the guillotine or thought up the ovens are less noxious? or that the people who lured Jews into the ovens or afterward pried from their jaws their gold crowns are to be regarded with a more minor horror? Look at the hands of the Fuhrer, pictured by Herr Hoffmann, G.D.L.: his hands are signing the leader’s name across the bottom of his photograph, an image no doubt also created by H. Hoffmann’s sycophantic lens; these hands hold a grand pen in position and a glorious image flat; the Fuhrer is right-handed of course; the fingers of the left are forked so that the signature seems to be crawling out between them, out of a guarded area; the light—look, you can see it—raises the ridges, defines the wrinkles of the knuckles, especially that of the left forefinger, so they assume a wartlike appearance, as if each digit wore a ring of ringed skin; and—see— the nails are trimmed, neatly manicured, of course clean, the nails of a clerk at the very least, while the pen is like a long black gun barrel (I do not sentimentalize); but the best touch is the way the shadow of the pen’s shaft shines so darkly over the writer's wrist and onto his sleeve, a bend which recapitulates the awkward V the fingers of the left hand have made, as well as the grasp Hitler has on the instrument so that the right index finger is simply extended
       into the nib and nail of the pen, which might be commissioning some hundred dozen deaths but in this case is simply autographing his picture, although the action has been staged, that’s clear enough, because the pen's point is in the middle of the finished signature: A. Hitler, already written on his portrait's sleeve; and I say—1 would argue—that there is a difference between a command and its obedience, a deed and its description, and while willing either may be wrong or right, the guilt or merit is of a different kind. Finally, however, I am adding to the tangency of the judge, who orders the execution, that of the dreamer who merely wishes on a dark star for the demise of an enemy, who simply prays for it, possibly aloud, perhaps in the presence of murderous minions, men who know how to measure their eventual reward, and who therefore move its reality. What 1 refuse to do is accept the suggestion that the dreamer is thereby more of a damnable fellow than the guy who dumped the corpse in the river.
          Hum, Herschel demurs. Look, I tell him, suppose I want to eat my chicken but I don’t want to twist its neck. Is this unreasonable? No. It is civilized. Suppose I preferred killing the chicken. Is that attitude really superior? Suppose I chose chicken because neck-wringing was my real delight. Attractive means make ends meet.
          The photograph “shows’’ Hitler signing his name, but he is not signing his name, he is pretending. And a wish may be staged to look like an intention. The dearly beloved German leader “did" damn little. His hands posed; he postured; he preached; he sulked; he charmed; he threw tantrums. Hitler went about wishing like a will-o’-the-wisp, as though he had Aladdin’s lamp, as if he were the prince of beggars, and left it to others to find a fulfillment for each cup of hope he held out.
          How my mind mills about. To think I had the discipline to drudge for decades only to sit in this spill now like the penpoint in the blot it’s made. Not like the Dictators pen nose-down in the middle of His Name. No. There’s something in this morning’s mood that's been caused by a pale pasteboardy image and its jolt to my memory: those summer days with Lou, working in longhand (wonderful phrase), nearly naked, my arm sticking to my notes, elevated by the intensity of our affair, exultant about the progress of my book, that small room of ours all the world I wanted, cunt crazed, she said, yet with a smug smile; there is something in that loosely formal portrait of the Indians Martha has displayed in our parlor which leads me sadly to remember my amusement when Lou asked me the inevitable, always inane, question: why does this matter so? why do you write? on such a shitty subject? my reply chuckling out of me as easily as perspiration: I write to indict mankind. I went on working for a while before adding—it was an honest afterthought—of
           course, the Fiihrer has already done my indicting for me. Not by being such a monster himself—that brat, no monster he—but by eliciting the monstrous from others. Epiphanies of evil. Much later, when Lou realized 1 really wasn’t joking, she began to pack her person for eventual departure.
             If people disliked in me what I dislike in them, 1 wouldn't dislike them. We would have reached an understanding.
             There is one essential to any space devoted to study which my bad habits haven’t permitted: room to pace. Even when my mind meanders, my nerves grow tight, and this is never more emphatically the case than at this desk: thinking the page, practicing a lecture, dreaming an idea. Usually I sideslip bookstacks and walk the hall, or I once walked the halls, before the behemoths and other bureaus began to bulk about in it. Now two persons cannot pass without one pulling over to the curb. Especially two fats. Instead of taking a makeshift turn about the property, I slide my mind into another gear and let my eyes light on one of the few photographs 1 have pinned up near my desk. Several are by Heinrich Hoffmann, G.D.L. (aforementioned), Photographer Designate of the Fiihrer’s Court, der ReichsbildberichterstaUer, and one of these, frequently my favorite, shows a fatherly-looking Adolf in his simple suit, his plain dark tie, seated at a table showing perhaps a postcard to a little girl in braids who is standing just in front of her marceled mother as if she had that moment slipped from her mother’s lap (although she is too large for that). The girl is smiling shyly; the mother is smiling broadly; the Fiihrer is smiling smugly. Now, with a longer, closer look, the situation becomes clear. The child has just received Adolf’s autograph. Indeed, the photographer calls his picture “Kleine Autogrammjdgerin." Her right hand is taking a pen from Hitler’s hand while her left is holding the white card on which his signature has no doubt been boldly written. It is a happy moment for all, including Herr Hoffmann, whose Leica has produced another piece of nearly perfect propaganda.
             There are many admirable touches: the little box of cookies on the table, for instance, the well-lit if customary winged pin in Hitler’s buttonhole, the mother’s pleasantly simple frock, the child’s braids and apron, a haze of her back hair rising in the mountain breeze to cross in front of her mother’s face like a caress for the camera, the way the sun shines on the Fuhrer’s fatherly countenance, the small lock—perhaps six strands—which has drifted from the edge of that famous part and fallen on his forehead, and his rumpled left sleeve, perhaps the two elements which soften Hitler’s otherwise manikined figure, then the metal clasp which prevents the tablecloth from flapping in the wind, as well as the silver dish in which the cookie box lies like a beached boat, and, not least, though last on this list, the mother’s simple bracelet and wrist-watch, like her lapped hand, at rest.
          With a magnifying glass you can read the brand name of the cookies on the box and the time on the face of the mother’s watch. It is twenty minutes to twelve. Bahlsen makes these Leibniz-hekse. The mountains are enveloped in mist.
          There are other things, of course, especially in black-and-white photography of this kind, where contrast is treated as if it were the whole art, points we see in the print which almost unobtrusively gather and reflect light, not alone the Fuhrer’s pin or the white disks on the cookie box, but the small charm that hangs on a chain about the little girl’s neck, the clasp which holds her braids, and the two rows of pearly buttons down the front of Mother’s dress: objects which form a discrete line of glints across the midsection of the photograph. Otherwise the composition is made of horizon-like layers: the dimly distant mountains, the three observant heads, and Hitler’s five hands: his, returning pen and paper, the girl's, joining his in the task by accepting them, the mother’s, left in her lap, right one barely out of sight; and by the crooks of the arms, which reach across the picture like the rail that runs behind the group and protects them from the—let’s say—precipice, since this was probably taken at the Berghof and they are perched on a peak; and lastly by the community of gazes which draws us to the card and to the divine name that’s been penned there, possibly across a photo of the Fiihrer in a military coat.
               Kamera: Leica, Format: 2,4 x 3,6, Oiptik: Elmar 1: 3,5, F = 5 cm, Blende: t: 3,5,
                   Negativ: Peromnia-Film, Belichtungszeit. 1/50 Sek., Handaufnahme.
          The house has been awake for a while. I have heard toilets flush, and the pipes make their morning rumble. The boys' rapid steps—always in a hurry— tell me they’ve gone downstairs to play spoon-a-tune in bowls of milk-sogged cereal as they’ve done almost since birth, interrupting one another, crossing out a brother’s unwelcome voice with strident overshout, flipping flakes like wet leaves turned into toys, a bit of food fighting now symbolically reduced to spritzes from their spoon tips, and securing space at the breakfast table by stacking their schoolbooks in strategic places like castle keeps and signal towers. The bangs are Martha’s. She allows doors to close of their own accord, so mostly they stand open waiting for a draft to let them shout slam. You cannot tell from the noise where she is, only where she’s been. All the taps she has visited drip 1 listen to these sounds as a visitor might, as one reading the news: are my hosts awake? is the bathroom free? is it appropriate now to enter their society? though of course I listen to avoid any encounter, waiting for the moment when the house will be mine, which will be the instant I hear the squinch of cold gravel under tires as Martha drives off to her work and the kids to school, because 1 can normally expect my spirits to rise, and I shall walk
          about the house as noisily then as 1 tiptoed quietly before, marking my turf with heavy tread, with speech and song, with rattle of keys and pocket change, farting freely, peeing with the john door ajar, jovial and relaxed—for a few more hours my own man.
             However, the erratic and broken course of my morning mind has had a dampening effect, as has the close gray sky, the cold gray grass, the ash-gray gravel, the car's side as it backs out the drive, gray with salt wheelsprayed from the highway, and the tires already tired although they've only begun their roll. Standing close to the glass, though somewhat hidden by a clump of drape, 1 allow myself to say, with Martha's car turning onto the road in a small spew of stone, You believe you are leaving me, Marty, old rump, but I’m long gone into my own word, my own flesh, my own hole.
             "Die Hande des FiXhrers," that one photo’s called. I am overwhelmed by a feeling of powerlessness, as if my will to lift my arm, to clench my own fist, even, has been signed away. I peck these keys with a chicken’s greed, a chicken’s headbobbed sense of time, a chicken’s fate: to feed on little specks of scattered grain which nevertheless lead me straight into the pot. Above my desk, in an irritatingly prominent place, 1 ve pinned another of Herr Hoffmanns master-works: Der Fiihrer full frontal, his mustache like a black square cut into the upper center of the photo and across the bottom of the Leader’s lightly lit nose. This time the dictator really seems to be one. His look is terribly severe, his mouth turned down, his jaw clenched, his brow beetled, his hands clasped just below his Sam Browne belt (or just above his balls); he is wearing the most modest military garb, a soft brown shirt with those buttoned-down cartridge pockets, a poorly knotted brown tie, rumpled trousers of the same material as the shirt, as unadorned as a country church, yes, you could say he was plain, with not a single badge of rank to distinguish him, only the dark party band on his arm as though he were in mourning, and the mustache, of course, his mark.
             My eyes stroll about the photograph since I can’t pace. Back and forth, bitter eye to bitter eye on him, resilient lip to lip on them, the anonymous others, up and down, along a wrinkle, into a shadow, over and onward, their anonymous hair combed down, greased into the scalp, controlled by the party, around and around, button to button, foreground to rear, brown after brown, badge to belt, the effort...the effect of my walk......
             Is. Pointlessness. Pointless even to complain of it. Pointless to do A. Pointless to not. Not the pointlessness which merely means futile, useless, as if there were other, more effective, ways; not the pointlessness which simply suggests the absence of a goal in this or that case, or describes randomly erratic action, unpredictable and foolish; no, but point less ness, the dwindling of desire, point less ness, the weakening of resolve, point less ness, the absence of any value,
       good or ill, point less ness, the shoreline of the banal, not just the rows and ranks of same upon same—boot banner tread badge strap look—but all those differences which do not matter—height weight hair eyes sex age—and not just because eventually there’s the grave, because that’s a kind of end after all; no, the point less ness of nerves, worry, fear, anticipation, care, god dead or alive, life short or long, painful or pleasant, neither is needed, neither sought, nothing avoided, nothing scrapped, nothing bought, believed or not, Monday or Sunday, sitting or standing, ill or well, prosperous or poor, no diff, no nevermind, then to die and be destroyed, then to die and spend eternity playing golf, then to die and become bones, die and see God, every result the same as spots are for the fly that lights on the tablecloth, here rather than there, who knows? cares? yet every shrug should be canceled, since shrugging says something, yawning says something, humming to oneself, silence, as they always say, says something; no, pointless to laugh, cry, pout, pointless to whistle, whisper, whimper, shout, pointless to point, to not, to reiterate, remind, remember, to
         Behind the Fiihrer, similarly solemn, a crowd of brown boys, twelve with bodies, four with faces, arranged to suggest that Hitler is standing in their middle rather than at their head, merely one of many, though not himself a youth, a fathers resourceful firm face for his phiz, a serious calm look on theirs, confident, direct of gaze, open of countenance, Aryan of race, hair, hands, and collars in place, swastikas showing, point, aim, purpose, common goal, embraced,
         . , bleib unser Fuhrer, wir stehen geschlossen hinter Dir, im Leben und, wenn es sein muss, auch im Sterben!"
         The nation had been disgraced. 1 have been banished from her bed, from her ripe roly-poly body, boobs slowly sloping, hips heavily spread, thimble-sized nips rising from the center of round mush brown pools, bellybutton now deeply in a crease of fat, plenty of tangled never blond pubic hair, and then
         1 always so admired those nipples. They were rarities, Babies ought to have been beauties just to suckle them, and beatific after. They ennobled lips, cheeks, mouth, empowered tongue. Yet my kids show no such laudable effects. Sallow-faced louts. Eloquent as a fly's buzz. Nor, to be fair, do I show any salubrious consequences, none I’ve noticed which could be credited to them. Yet the ought remains. 1 remember, my mouth remembers, my lips rejoice to recall, the moment I let my head lean over to lick a tip—these are mine, I thought with wonder—reverentially I sucked them into me, and then ... the entire ring around them . . . and then she squealed a bit in 1 imagined pleasant pain as I crammed as much of her breast as 1 could manage into my—well, what, maw, then?—into my must-have-been-famished mouth.
         The public had made a pact with him. As early as ’34 his followers were allying themselves with him in death. With him to speak for them, they needed
           no corporate unconscious; there, in his loudmouthed sprachquack brown-shirted outshout, suppressed resentments were finally supervoiced. His hands, die Hande dies Fiihrers, had learned to pause, to point, to threaten, clench, float, open, fan, flap, clap, pound, wave, greet, shake, and so on, to punctuate his passionate periods, to orchestrate the common hate.
             The paper I signed didn’t say 1 had to suck your prick, she said, disdain worn like a dime-store diadem. It didn’t say 1 had to show you my tits every minute your eyes were open. It didn't say I had to spread my legs like jam if you grew in your pants. It didn’t say I had to be miserable, just married. Ah, Martha, my ex-in-lax, I have my own hole now, your cunt is not the only cave. Even in death, the ceremony said, if need be. Even in death, the Ftihrer’s followers proclaimed, if it came to that. And they knew death would be where he’d take them: that land no one needs to promise. He gave them triumph, exultation, purpose, a sort of secular salvation. What is there for me, even momentarily, even in illusion, now that I’m as old as my scrotum looks, ready to vomit out my life here, bedded by the side of sorrow every night, digging my own wound, preparing my final place, what chance of fame and fortune, what hope of happiness now, now I must fuck my own hand? yes, who wouldn’t wish for hell to swallow his fellow shits in such a circumstance?
             I would have followed him just to get even; just to cause consternation; just to come with my mouth by jaculating Heil! just to join the great tribe he had created, the family of the Fiihrer, a state which stood for “strike back.” I would know he was a wimp in wolf’s clothing. 1 would know it was the sum of us in the vast ranks who were accomplishing Hitler’s beautiful barbarities, willing what he wished, succeeding for a change, screwing those who were screwing us, wiping smiles from faces like shit from the assholes they fronted for, desperate because 1 would live on empty otherwise, because all of us were pointlessly going to die, anyway; so what would I be risking, really? what would 1 lose that I had not already lost? and for a while 1 would ride high, for a while I would be a winner, for a time I would belong, my bronze body would straddle a bronze beast, feel metal sides beneath my metal thighs, life would have more than meaning, the future would be bright, cliches would rise like blinds to greet the morning, and I would have a place in line, I would have a certain superiority, 1 would have backed a winning team, I would be wearing a damn fine uniform, I would be a little finger, sure, but in a big fist; me and many would have joined, marched, aided, advised, risen from the ranks, traveled a new avenue up, and like most clerics, most politicians, most professional liars to the mind, we would have known what we were doing, and taken the trade-off, taken our chances—bitter with sweet for sweet's sake—taken everything we could get, why not? looted, raped, ruled our little regions of the Reich by day and desk,
       and then gone home happily, when the sun of our swell new hell had set, to kiss the Frau, beget the kids, pet the cat, be dog lapped, well fed, carried on a stream of beer to bliss, so to snooze our Sunday snooze on the Sunday sofa.
         Identifying with the victims, and hence engorged by pity, writers on the Third Reich—before my example—have never troubled to put themselves in the villains’ place, to imagine the unimaginable—it is easy to be a victim, you don’t have to do a thing, you simply weep and bleed—but, ah, the beater, to be the beater is not a role whose easy mastery is readily admittable; sympathies in such a cause are not idly, not routinely, not frequently enlisted; and were they to be, what then? what would one learn about oneself? would the soul’s hairs rise like a frightened animal’s? would one, one day during the exercise, feel that formerly feckless fist smash a hated face into blissfully bloody bits, sense the softness at the end of the blows as the cheekbones give, and all you have gone through go out through your arm like a bullet down a barrel, not so that tomorrow you will feel guilt, no, so that right now you will feel all the pow! in power, you will feel the clean in cleansed, you will feel just as in justified, you will feel reborn as in redeemed.
         1 can’t help wondering if there isn’t something about Martha’s mind which is as attractive to me, as wondrous to observe, as her nipples are—are still— though they rise from breasts which breathe only animosity. Is there some part of her personality, a part shared with the rest of humanity (we all have nipples necks eyes lungs), a streak through her character as though through her hair, which is equally distinguished, admirable, which, when 1 encounter it, stiffens me, draws me to her, opens my mouth at least for gee whiz! what wonders! something, a low whistle of surprise, as I say to myself, wow, oh boy, this trait, this mode of thought, this manner of expression, way of feeling, this is mine to enjoy, while my own corresponding organ of the spirit responds, hugs hers, warms, grows?
         Martha has a low skipping laugh, light, I guess throaty, husky? a laugh 1 used to hear, yes, in better days, a laugh which is enormously erotic, not for what it is in itself, although its rippling tones are pleasant enough, but because of what the laugh is always at, the laugh turning your attention to its object, illuminating it with appreciation and amusement, so that I smile as I simultaneously hear her and see it, feeling the same as she does then, smiling similarly, my chuckle also an answer, sharing something as bountiful as her breasts.
         Have you been edified by all this, class? I haven’t had a useful thought all morning. Hard to get about the house, however, even if pacing is really needed, not alone because of my books or her bureaus, but because of the memories I have to skirt, the clutter of old arguments I have to step over, the bruised air which can scarcely bear another blow, holes a pointed wit has poked in inflated
           reputations, odors of anger and bitterness in curtains, in corners, tables I dare not touch for fear of the tears turned to dust I’ll carry off on my fingers, every object in the house an image through which my thoughts will unwillingly pass into an intolerable past; though I can’t help wondering whether it was bad in the camps in the same way, if the sight of the thin barely bundled bodies of your companions lingered in their emptied beds like, later, the smell of their burning lived in your nose like its hair, or if present pain drove past pain away—no room for the old with the new so searingly fresh—the crazy need to stay alive still driving you to seek food, avoid guards, do as told, complete each little task as if it were the single focus of the wide world’s attention; impossible to know, yet guilt is only one reason why the house is an historical trap whose dangers drive me along an increasingly narrower path, for good memories are more painful than bad ones when all they bring is a bit of wistful longing to go with your regrets; yes, friend, once I had boobs in my bed which were softer, more warm and wobbly than you would believe boobs could be, and I had a friendly hand for my penis, too, to give it a small quick friendly shake, and there even was a warm voice at breakfast, not a wintry wind cooling the toast before the butter could get its breadside soft; no, it’s true, there were no guards or watchdogs, then, no lonely nightweeps, hatred of the moon in any of its phases, and even when we lay away from one another, as our dreams sometimes rolled us to the bed’s edge, we could still feel each degree of life there near us; yes, it once was that way, and even apart, as a day’s tasks might take us, we hand-in-handed it, encountering every difficulty as a pair, what a movie, eh? with singing strings; still, those things were possible during the golden age of our desire, hard to credit now, 1 know, as we auschwitz along on our merry way, grabbing at any crust, mind running wild, running into Der Fiihrer's photo to hide, or into that one of Hermann Goering from ’33, posed and taken by Heinrich Hoffmann, natiirlich, because in the confines of that chin we can be free, ah, and in the whorl of the ear, too, as Hermann the Mighty bestows us his profile: stern, strong, how resolute, every light strike of star quality (if you want to bring in the movies), his softly coiffed well-rinsed Aryan hair above a brow that’s burning like a Wagnerian deity about to confront his destiny; oh, that’s some floodlamp the unseen side of his face is lit by—daylight, according to H. Hoffmann’s notes, assisted by five hundred warmly supportive watts— landing along the far ridge of the nose, lighting the upper lip line, the lower jaw, the farthermost jut of the courageous chin, and then spilling over the foreface like an enlivening wash so the skin glistens as if a bit oiled, and the corners of the mouth and eye lie in the softest of shadows and the ridges of the ear gleam, oh so cleanly scrubbed as well, Mutter would be proud; but the touch which marks the Master's shutter is the Reichsmarschall’s far eye, which one imme-
       diately sees as blue, rising like a moon beyond the nose, bright, with many watts enlivening the white, the iris defined even at that distance, what a stroke! even the pale eyebrows have been brushed by its benevolence; yes, the hair is blond, the face is pink, although the photograph is black and white, naturlich, and the head huge and hugely necked, ribboned, with a medal at the throat, while below that, on the left breast, along the top of a pocket, is pinned a row of honors—the Iron Cross of course, followed by the highest of military orders, Pour le Merite, made of a cross like a spinning propeller, a cross surmounted by a royal crown, while next to it are the cropped edges of another, suggesting that the line extends.
         Come on, who could resist such an image, Valhalla's finest? down from the Hall of Death to lead us to it, where it’s lodged no doubt on a mountaintop like a flower in a rock; though, of course, possibly there is a suggestion of coming corpulence in that thick neck, the torso, too, is hefty, and perhaps the pink flush in the cheeks is a bit beery, but why not? beer is for heroes, and, all right, the pose is somewhat vain, we have to blame the photographer for that, though he was no doubt doing his duty, causing his lamps to dote upon the Reichs-marschall’s face; yet, admit it, isn't that a Nordic nose? the gaze so forthright, the expression of the mouth so strong? what a dong he must drive into his woman, who'd be blond, big busted, with a womb like a cathedral, called Gretchen, Marta, some such, fit to be fucked by one of Nature’s natural rulers, as we can perceive from the features depicted here, every sign, from eyebrow to earlobe, bespeaking a genetic nobility, saying Superior, affirming a culture that’s German. Ja. Whoopee. Wohl.
         The great gods and goddesses, kids, are all blond. Jesus aint no grease-haired wop. Babies are born with blue eyes although the less fit see the sky fall from their faces finally, and downy blond baby hair turns a disappointing black or brown in time, and even the blond locks of Nordic Madchens darken in the pits of their arms, in the cleft of the crotch, since only the pure are high, and only the high are holy, and that holds for hair; furthermore don’t we observe how the darker sunburned races lust after creamy Northern girls, straw tressed, rose nipped, as if they wished to whiten their progeny?
         Well, you never know. It didn’t work for me. Carl is a klutz and his sibling worse, sallow little simps whose skills lie in their range of whines. The bicker brothers. The Kohler calamity. They stick with their mother, mostly, thank god, though she doesn't fancy them either. After God created snot he made small boys with pugly noses to stuff it in. They show their respect for God’s law by picking it out. No. Genetics is too chancy to make into an ideology.
         Once upon a time, class, nearly every student sitting where you're sitting had been sent to the university by their aspiring parents, often at some sacri-
           fice, so that they might live a better life than they had been born to and raised in: with more money, more culture, more esteem, more comfort, less struggle, less anxiety, fewer humiliations, fewer disadvantages, than father and mother had known, suffered, often barely survived. Nearly every one of these seats was filled by some young person with a mission, and all felt they might—would, indeed—surpass their parents. Now, though, look at you. Half have a wealthy and successful father who is damned if he’ll ever look at you again if he has to lift his eyes to see where you are standing, whom you haven’t a chance to pass, even on a plane, and the other half have mothers equally hotshot, professionals themselves, or so skillful at spending money they can’t be emulated. You are doomed to a lesser life, most of you, what do you think of that? But 1 rejoice at all who are downwardly destined. You will make wonderful recruits for the Party of the Disappointed People.
              If my kids beat me at anything, ever, I should leave this land a laughingstock. Thanks to the get I’ve got, I shall never be deposed by my sons. I’ll probably die before I experience the shame they'll bring to my name.
              My father used to ask me if “that” was what they had taught me at college until I told him the question was an old Jewish query. “That” stood for whatever opinion I was spouting at the time. Free trade, for instance. The irrelevance of superior people. Of course those of us who had surpassed our parents had to reject a good deal of what they represented; how else could we demonstrate the polish they had paid for unless we shone with annoying brightness in the family’s eye? Thank god, mama’s cooking had to be eaten only during holidays. Dad was out of date, his opinions formed at the same age ours were. Uncles, we said, were snores. So, for their sacrifices, in response to their pride, they got ingrates and smartasses. Served them right.
              Wise up. Don't encourage your kids to get ahead. Don’t count on their support during the rot end of your life. I plan to inherit my own estate, retire on it, and vote against every school levy the newlyweds propose. Wise up. Don’t invest in a future you will never see, a future which will despise you anyway, a future which will find you useless. Pay for your own burial plot. Get the golf clubs out. Die with a tan your daughter’s thighs would envy.
              Wasted wisdom. I promise myself: no more trouble. I promise to be bland. Just teach the subject. Ah, but the subject. . . Die Hande des Fiihrers.
              On the upstairs landing. Had to get away from those photos, my desk, morose thoughts, pretrial ideas. My ability to concentrate, whether reading or writing or even speaking, has weakened badly. Lately, I find I don t want to touch anything for long; nervous, nervous as a fly who fears the swatters fall, who knows it is safe in the air if at all. Her big bureaus are afraid of nothing. Nothing moves them. How heavy they are now with all the earth 1 have fed
      them. Thems. That's what they are. I expect the boards beneath them to bend, cracks to appear in ceiling plaster. So far no sign. Mirrored wardrobe doors double me. I descend. Breathe better. Am 1 imagining I can begin to smell the soil? One day she will discover everything. What then?
         Sometimes, when the circumstances are right, that gray sky seems to materialize at dusk to descend toward the furrowed portion of the field, and as it does it darkens everything on the ground as well, where a little gray daylight had been reflected before, so that two shades separated by what seems a single shadow begin to close on one another, the sky settling, the earth swelling, the shadow shrinking, two expanses of experience mingling. I am aware of my weakness in philosophy, but were 1 a thinker of real thoughts, 1 think 1 would think only about the evanescent, and the character and condition of consciousness; because 1 know that is all I am, even if 1 feel I am standing in my living room (what a name for the family sofa), surrounded by a world wide as the world is, and that world oceaned in space, as alone in its orbit as I am in mine, however minor mine is—up and down, desk to window, window to workplace, typewriter to tunnel—and even if 1 feel 1 know how others feel—even if 1 feel 1 feel their feeling—even if I can read the brand of cookies—Bahlsen— lying on the Fuhrer’s table—just the same, the shades of gray which make up that image aren’t the object, aren’t Adolf Hitler handing out his name, contain no cookies or their calories; nor are my sensations when 1 sense them, my feelings when 1 feel them, in any way in the world of their objects, though the photo is certainly there, in the realm of its referent; so where am 1, then, other than nowherei5 my mind’s eye? the ghost in the dream? where are we?
         It is the question.
         The birds have been quiet, 1 realize, because 1 haven't fed them. Okay, there’s a thought. It’s, as we say, in my head. If I am in this room, looking out, then my thought is also in this room. Is that correct- Of course not. If there is a pain in my foot and my foot is in my shoe, is there a pain in my shoe? Does the pain track the floor, wear, like rough skin, a hole in its sock, for if there is a sock on my foot then is there not a sock on my pain? Why not? The pain in my shoe, the thought in my head, leave no residue, affect nothing except possibly my will, causing me to take my shoe off, leading me to feed the birds. Soon the birds will be singing again. You hear their song. I heard it too. But you hear only birds, let’s suppose, whereas I, who know them all by sight, hear the chirp of sparrows and the whistled squeaks of starlings, the whoowhoo of the doves, the cardinal’s special call, the chickadee’s dee dee, the jay’s coarse caw, and so on; that is, my hearing is different from yours because it is more informed; I am more likely to hear where the calls are coming from than you are;
      I am more likely to recognize the difference between mere announcements
THE TUNNEL
             and alarm. We are hearing the same sounds just as we may be reading the same text, yet we are not having the same experience any more than we are likely to be sharing the same interpretation of some lines of Holderlin. My hero. Where are your birds? where are mine? The print lies on the page, but the meanings, and their corresponding things? Lie? oh, they lie, but where? Ancient puzzles which will not go away; simple puzzles which refuse their solutions.
               The class will have to wait. 1 have forgotten the birds. They need to be fed even if my students are happy to go hungry. Martha selects and purchases their seed; 1 distribute her choices: that is the arrangement. We have an arrangement for everything. There is her half of the refrigerator, and mine (one shelf smaller); there is her scotch and my bourbon, my toothpaste and her shoe polish, my paper towels and her Kleenex, her bed, my bed, her belly, my belly, her animosity, my antagonism. We’ve worked it out. Since she went her way, she has her way. Fortunately, 1 have mine, my cursed course. 1 have my own checks, my own account; she banks at a different bank; trades at a different grocery; eats early, I late. Two cars with different roads to town. We’ve worked it out. She sends me a card on my birthday; I leave her a jar of my jam. We converse several times a week on matters of mutual interest: the welfare of the children, the condition of the Chevrolets, the maintenance of our cordons sa-nitaires, how to deal with mutual friends, unforeseen emergencies, anticipated breaks in our routines like special meetings, out-of-town trips, vacation plans. We are too fat to be unfaithful to one another. So we've worked it out.
               1 am an intransitive man. I’m reconciled to it. Even my husbanding has no object. With my tunnel 1 have committed the ultimate inactive act. After all, what is a useless hole? I can honestly say I have accomplished Nothing. (Ulysses answered Polyphemus with a similar riddle.) Such doughnut-shaped deeds have amassed this pile of paper, determined my present detachment from my work, developed my unimpinging personality—’unim-,’ yes—endlessly rehearsed these unheard lectures, projected my antiutopian visions onto a darkly boarded black screen, formed there my disheveling plans. I’ve done nothing except fill her drawers with dirt. When she finds out, what then?
               Corn for the crows. I’ve slipped that into the diet. Martha hates crows. Anyway, I’ve provided corn for the crows, millet for the doves—they adore it—sunflower seeds for the cardinals and the jays, popcorn for the starlings, whom 1 detest as gypsies are detested but Martha insists 1 feed, a little peanut butter on a sloping board, suet in a wire basket, cornflakes, bread crumbs, grape-nuts, which draw every kind of sparrow—the very ordinary English, the shy white-throat, flocks of field, a few song sparrows, finches and siskins, too—raisins for iron, chopped-up apple cores in lieu of the sun, with bits of stale brick cheese to occupy the squirrels. In a little closet near the kitchen, I’ve the necessary
      bins, the requisite scoops, a bag in which i collect nuts, peels, crumbs. Martha remembers that camp guards kept pets, loved birds. She throws it up to me. 1 have a tubular feeder hung from the limb of a tree, another shaped like a house, and three separate areas where 1 scatter corn and millet. The whoofle of the doves as they light is especially pleasant. So you can enjoy their demonstrations of greed, she says, throwing it up to me. So 1 can watch. Yes. [ do watch. Their little pin-eyed heads abobbin. But 1 would watch you, Marty, with
      the same interest (1 do not say); I would watch you eat, dress, turn gray___gray
      is not a particularly pretty thing in a blonde—watch you wash and pee and brush your hair and choose a magazine and simply sit and read. I’d. If. You'd.
         I carry the feed in several sacks onto our wide back porch. I love even its rickety railing. My breath clouds and the cold air which replaces it feels cleansing. The sky doesn’t begin at some point well above me as it usually does, like glass over cheese, so I might say "l see the sky," but settles to the ground in a manner we associate with fog. Still the edges of everything are crisp, distances have been drawn up like waiting carriages in front of an inn. Things are too cold to be obscure. However, there’s not a dot of bird, or a call, only a little tree creak in the light wind. Utter absence of shadow. Like the sower in painting and song, I spread the corn around my feet, refill the feeder, rebutter the peanut butter board, and return to the house at last a little chilled. Through the still screened window of the porch door I await the birds. They do not immediately come, but I am not disturbed. I can be patient.
         I suppose, after an appropriate period of dismal grief, Martha will find a fresh cat, but for the moment my birds have nothing to fear.
         I should begin to think about lunch. Perhaps I'll browse through one of my books. Get back on track. Eat old words. At least produce the outline of a lecture. I don’t dare make any more history up, though the students would never know; you could tell them the Roman Empire lasted until the twenties when it was repealed by Prohibition. No. I have to be deliberate about my lies. I’d better not try to—what does Culp call it?—wing, yes, wing it. Not a chirp, not a peep, not a whistle. The starlings should arrive first. Popcorn draws them like a crayon. For lunch—what? Martha complains my mayonnaise has been encroaching, but what about her rolls? There’s some salami on my side, might do, a little lettuce, the right mustard, no tomatoes this time of year, the lettuce looking like a tight wad of green Christmas paper, and a shallow dish of pickles, the pickles lying like slimy logs in a gherky pool. Cheese as yellow as the mustard. Martha insists on buying that damn Bunny brand, air loaf style, so soft the butter flattens the slice like a body lolling on a—bed—yes, it’s mattress bread. Now a squirrel is doing loops over the cold lawn. He’s my first guest. No one else came while I was checking the fridge’s slim fixings. Look at how well
            the birds fare. Better than I. Salami so old it’s beginning to curl. Bread so stale it’s beginning to crack. Cheese with a light snow of mold. No one to take care of me, see to it I am fed and fucked, what’s a wife for? keep the house clean, kids quiet, husband content; here’s one finally, just a sparrow, common as ruck, no breaks in this business, I have to invent my friends, and make them into enemies so as not to be bored. A cardinal. A male wow of red. Okay. Now they’ll all be along. 1 don’t have to remain on alert. Routine has been recovered. Order preserved.
               Canned soup. Good on a cold day. My cupboard is bare. But Martha’s shelves have three selections arranged in a boastful line: chicken with rice, beef with noodles, and plain tomato. I could borrow one and leave a note. Perhaps, with a message, she wouldn’t mind. But it’ll give her a leg up. I’ll be beholden. Do I want that? Better to chew my dry salami. Our tastes diverge, anyhow. She prefers baloney; her soups are the strawberry and vanilla of their kinds. She likes meat loaf, creamed chicken, New England boiled dinner, baked beans. The question which comes to your mind, class—oh, I anticipated it, I’ve taught this subject before, after all—is: what could I have seen in someone who preferred baked beans to cassoulet, creamed chicken to jugged hare? Well, what 1 would have seen is myself. When Martha and I were first making out, my tastes were small town too, timid, and Mid: pie and potatoes, meat and gravy. Hers remain bland, familiar, limited, once Hawkeye now Hoosier. She fills her tummy with Bunny. Smear of ultrayellow mustard, leaf of iceberg lettuce, slice of hothouse tomato (white core on a pale pink ground), the square of the sandwich then triangled, put upon a plate with a handful of chips, a squirt of catsup, and a stick of pickle. She has a paper plate palate. She likes to eat barbecue and boil things. If 1 stooped to one of her soups, she’d throw it up to me.
               How, you might furthermore ask (if you possessed the information), how can you admire a man who habitually rose near noon, ate thick gruel, got briefed by the hour, liked oatmeal soup, too, and had his baked potato soaked in raw linseed oil; a man who enjoyed what he called lunch around five, napped during dull moments of conversation, then worked all evening, took tea at midnight and talked till four, his entourage struggling against sleep but dormous-ing anyway, as anyone might. In truth, occasionally the Fiihrer dozed while he spoke. I reply: It may surprise you to learn that I do not admire this man, never have, hold no brief, etc., though Herm had his points, just consider his behavior at the trials, his appropriate disdain, his kiss-my-ass attitude throughout, his trim appearance, too, and how he cheated the hangman—after all, hanging, that sort of death, was an additional indignity. You'.d have thought he’d stolen cows instead of priceless works of art.
         Back to the Underwood. Reluctantly. Lunch in the offing. 1 hope I’m not stuck with peanut butter and jelly. I could open my pants and play with myself, but instead I unwrap an overlooked piece of hard candy I have no heart for history anymore. I never know when the students will walk out on me again, protesting this or that remark, making an example of professors who they suppose support that pointless and profitless Adventure, saving Slants from Slopes. Ive told them I'm glad that patriotism is dead, that nationalism is no more; I’m delighted that they would rather study and write than serve and fight; but they are so ignorant they can’t recognize irony, so frightened they listen to nothing, simpiy parade their pusillanimousness as pacifism, project their self-loathing onto the police, make protests as if they were making war, and congratulate themselves for their courage when they are carried off to spend a night in the pokey with a dozen druggy friends and a few priests.
         What do they know about fascism? They only know how to shout its syllables at the police.
         Perhaps I might pique them if 1 got ahead of myself and told them about Himmlers speech at Posen. Late in 1943, class, Heinrich Himmler was given the task of informing various branches of the German military about the Final Solution of the Jewish Question and, at the same time, divulging to them his estimate of the program’s chances for success. He gave fifteen such briefings during the early days of 1944. Things were not going well on the Eastern Front and the hierarchies could use a little bucking up, a bit of good news. Thus, on January 26, 1944* *n a theater in Posen, Himmler told 260 high-ranking army and navy officers of the “all but" completion of the Final Solution. Six million Jews have been destroyed, he said, to waves of applause, or should I say, rounds. Not many of the military sat on their hands that day. At Sonthofen he told ribboned rows of generals that the Jewish problem had been removed. To the navy brass he boasted of his firmness in executing women and children. His news was everywhere well received. Otherwise the women will breed, he explained; otherwise the children will grow up with hate in their hearts. His explanation was everywhere approved. If we remember our history, we shall understand Himmler’s project as another application of the Roman-solution-to-the-Carthage-question. Since the Nazis intended to occupy Jewish property, they didn’t salt the soil.
         I understand my students are opposed to the napaiming of babies. What delicatessel
         It s only eleven-thirty but 111 undertake lunch anyway. I am too restless to remain in this chair. The sink is soothing. Birds will be moving across the window while I peel the garlic. I’ve settled—just now—on a small pot of noodles with a little bacon, dab or two of tomato paste, a few flakes of chili pepper, and
             the garlic, to sauce it. Pasta Perfect in a Pinch. The contentment of the mind is not as easily obtained.
               How did the Pythagoreans do the division? At the Olympic Games (of Life), there are those who come to compete, those who come to sell hot dogs, beer, and pop, and those who fill the seats. 1 think that’s right. My modification: there are those who wish, those who will, and those who watch the outcome of the wishing and the willing, i.e., those who write. American students are always surprised to learn that the Pythagoreans counted the spectators as constituting the highest class.
               1 like the low hissh the water makes just before it reaches a boil, and the smell of garlic on my fingers; even the tomato paste’s harsh red odor revives me.
             I break a small fistful of pasta into the pot. Three or four minutes, no more. In a tormented white tangle. Of course bacon plays great music, and the grease resonates on the iron. The tomato eases into the heat, softens its insistence, just as the garlic grows soft and mild like a mushroom. Could have used. A few broccoli flowerets. Would have been nice. The pepper’s like flame ash. I fork the paste about the pan, lay one smear over another, then drain the pasta under a flush of tap, give the colander several good bounces to force the last drops out, and tip the boil into the fry for a final slither toward dente and its luscious coating by the sauce.
               1 am so full of wisdom this morning, children. 1 just gave you one central division of our species. The difference between reactionaries, conservatives, liberals, and radicals constitutes another, which involves our attitudes relative to past, present, and future conditions—but of that, more later. The semester is endless. The essential philosophical bifurcation is between those who admire and aspire to just such classifications, and prefer their distinctions to be clean and complete, and those who dislike such lines, and prefer continua, so that they are always denying the distinctions made by the classifiers, or are busy blurring them as fast as they are made—Aristotle on one side, Hegel on the other. Scrubbers and smudgers. Finally, group, and the profoundest cut of all, is between those who solve human problems by seeking solutions (Final or otherwise) through changes made to the world, and those who reach accommodations by altering themselves. One says: if you want pie, and there is no pie, then bake one. The other says: if there is no pie, see if there’s some cake— cake is just as good—and if there is nothing to eat at all, decide you’re not really hungry. There is a variation. If there’s no pie, nag your wife to make one. In short, if your will is thwarted, switch it to a wish, then will that someone fulfill it for you.
               Plates get too cold in these cabinets. I carry the pan to the kitchen table and place it on a pad. No sense in additional dirties. The stir fork will serve the
       diner. Strings of pasta slide about in the mouth. Good. They slide to slide until 1 tooth crush mouth mush 'em. The supremely simple is sometimes the completely deep. I could do daydreams, but the house does not feel much like a cozy den in this weather, the gray seems to have seeped into its atmosphere, the chill has gotten under my skin. Long soak in a hot tub might restore reverie's power to entertain, free the cock from its cowl. Let's say that the slightly pudgy brunette who sits in the second row has come to my office to ask about a grade. Her full breasts press against the fabric of her blouse. Aren't those actual nipple dents? dimpling the cloth? How easily the weenie is aroused. We have to work over women as though their engine were in a used car. The pasta is chewily perfect. I can do a few things well. Lou could close her soft firm fist so slowly that is fondly about my prick it would nearly squirt. Loud caws from the yard. Are the jays complaining of a cat? It would have to be a stranger on the prowl. There are moments, even with my mouth full, when I wish 1 were dead.
         Let me tell you a few things about the camps, kids. Concentration camps, like prisons generally, are nets full of fish, each fin struggling for its own survival, each tail wiggling to its own tune. Not only does such desperate competition corrupt the inmates, who begin by bribing guards for favors, and turning their fellows in, but the guards, suspect sorts to start with, also find their way to a profit from the system. Camp commandants soon see themselves as captains of ships, ships of fools, ships loaded with slaves, thieves, snitches, and blackguards of every description, ships full of dupes too, ordinary people who do not understand the ruthless world they’ve been put in or know how to cope with criminals who do so much more than embezzle. Furthermore, these captains feel at sea, far from the control of any force on land, as unaccountable as a deity. Not only do they inflict unspeakable miseries on their cargo and cruelly mistreat their crew, it isn't long before they are cheating their masters as well, amassing stores of clothing, caches of rings and watches, to sell on the sly, stinting on supplies, practicing extortion, indulging every proclivity, enjoying their power as only the formerly impotent can, killing the useless and weak, those who might think of themselves someday as rivals, or anyone who might expose their behavior to their superiors—in this case, the hierarchies of the Third Reich.
         In short, the Jews, who Hitler feared would corrupt the State, did corrupt the State in an unforeseen way, for example, by having wealth which could be confiscated, jewels and money, teeth and hair, their work as well as their watches. And, as always happens, those who capture and confine criminals become criminals, so we are soon seeking protection from the police (isn't that the claim of the radical students?). Lawyers and politicians are next in line. In this way the twitch continues toward the top like a wave in a rope.
              Judges needed to be judged, the Fuhrer learned, guards guarded, the Fuhrer discovered, spies spied on, the Fuhrer found; the untrustworthy could not be trusted to remain so, and once certain people had been trained to lie and steal and murder on your behalf, they were likely to begin to cheat and filch and kill on their own. Camp commandants were soon skimming off the Reich’s profits from watches and rings, the sale of clothes and hair, the smelting of silver and gold, the work of the wretches under their care. One case, in particular, is of interest. Have I said so? Adolf received the news lying down. One of his own SS judges, a Konrad Morgen, had begun an investigation into the administration of some of the camps (of whose existence he had been initially unaware). Buchenwald was a shithouse of official corruption. Its commandant, Karl Koch, was not merely slurping up the gravy, he was eating the meat and selling the plate. Worse, he was killing Jews to ensure his own safety.
              Who turned the turd in, do you suppose? . . . class? . . . who ratted on the fink? who judased the jasper? . . . why, an accomplice in crime called Kohler, who tattled to the judge to save his neck and nose, which nevertheless ended out of joint and in a noose, for they found him hung in the cell where he was being detained by the prosecution as a material witness. Koch killed Kohler to cover up his crimes—that seems clear. Or Kohler, in a fit of guilt, kicked a milking stool from beneath his feet and stretched the truth. What kind of shame, then, did he feel? that which clouds the conscience after the murder of so many—how many?—Jews? like the stench-filled smoke of their burning bodies; or the pangs which come on account of such a classic betrayal, that of a companion, the commandant, who trusted him to do the dirty when the dirty was needful, and cheat the Reich of its resources, and rake some coin from the ash heap where weary and unwilling workers ended?
              History is silent on this point. History is always silent in a crisis. Kohler, crying out “culpa, culpa," was redeemed when he died, having blown the silver whistle and called the cops. Whaddya say? Was he? Koch and Kohler. What a diptych. The pause that refreshes. Couldn’t be my namesake. Couldn’t be a near or far relation. Hung in his own belt as though his head had been his belly. Couldn’t be anyone close. Kohler, crying “mea,” “mamma mea," maybe, choked by the goat he had chosen to bear the blame. Good old Kohler, small through it all, cheapjack from John to Jimmy. Great stock. Good genes. Fine old family.
              Konrad Morgen marched from camp to camp fearlessly crying fraud. Adolf received the news lying down. Koch was shot. Mafia-style, one imagines. Finally, they had to call the clown off. It is amusing. Funny man, Morgen. Arresting robbers for running red lights. Exposing his superiors while doing their duty. Full of patriotic fervor and innocent outrage. Untouchable. Wrapped in the swastika like a good cigar in its aromatic leaf. Kohler, in contrast, was a petty
       little squealer, lacking even the courage of his crimes, attempting to escape between the cracks, underestimating the stupidity of the bureaucracy, which couldn’t/wouldn't conceal its source, which wouldn’t/couldn’t protect its informant, and, in consequence, getting himself hung by the length of his trust.
         Perhaps I should dedicate this inside history to him: THE BLABBERMOUTH OF BUCHENWALD. Not bad, but better: 1 could inscribe Guilt and Innocence in Hitler's Germany to the memory of Karl Koch (guilt) and Konrad Morgen (innocence), and then slip Kohler’s pages in between. Perfect. What a diptych.
         Now it's not another day. It's the samest. No relief from the cold, the gray, the clock, the clutter, the unwarmed rooms, rehearsal time, obsessive thoughts, my crimeless crimes, the chimney swifts like spots in the eyes.
         I stalk about the house. At loose ends. Stairs. They descend. I climb. Windows. 1 watch out. In the dining room, a conclave of empty chairs. Light in the sink like traces of tap drip. Once even a piece of pressed glass would remember our marriage, how we bought happiness at auctions, and a sugar spoon stirred one memory into another, coffee into cream, dream into desire. And how we made things when we had no money but had hands. I scrubble my scalp and hope for a lift, a little alertness, a sudden twist of attention— Even my clothes feel cool and unfriendly. To be followed by the kids coming home. I’ll be eyed suspiciously. Martha will bustle about, splashing space the way you create a clean swatch of water around you, and I’ll bob off to be about my baffling business, an embarrassment to the real life of the house, now full of catcall and conniption. The birds will have gone. Next comes nightfall. I'll sit in my chair and dig into darkness. It grows emptier and emptier by the spoonful. The timbers of this old house pop. Cooling pipes pinch their warmer water. But now there is nothing but the slow gray drain of afternoon. Night is not yet a cloud. The kids do not shatter this deadly calm. Not yet So much of life hangs about like this— quiet as enamel though capable of clatter—like this, like wire hangers in a closet. Waiting for the waiting to be over. Even robins do not migrate anymore. The stairs rise. I descend. To watch my window. And on the ground a poor bird has halted, beak full of what he’s found. Poised. Eyes like sequins sewn on a shroud.
   SUSU, I APPROACH Susu, you are a slime of YOU IN MY DREAMS green down a lavatory wall.
                            Susu, I approach you in my dreams. From my youth I followed a star like the Magi; like Germany, I had a destiny. Perhaps it was you who were Mad Meg—a basket of ballocks slung
           under one arm, a sharpened penis in your hand like a swordsman, your eye an eye like history’s, your mouth wide open for a cry, the whole of your sleep outside you in a landscape lit by heatless fires which random guns had set beneath previously spitted meats and placidly congealing stews. Susu, you sang none of the old songs, none of the new.
                            A spider has lidded my john with its web, lengths lifted from the record player, a dance with a fly in the center instead of shit’s smooth seat and neighbor.
                                 The animals are taking over, midges and mosquitoes hover, and I shall be mad in a month.
                            Ants have organized the sugar; roaches have rifled the till; our woods are loud with crow and cougar; the moths are all drunk at my still.
                                 Leopard, lion, come from cover, the animals are taking over, and I shall be mad in a month.
             When I was she weeks old 1 was floated from my birthplace in a basket. 1 drifted up and down a dozen rivers before I found the slain Mahoning lying between banks of cinders and black gravel—a slit-open eel on a dirty plate. You sang, Susu, your cunt a Calypso. Susu, you were filth. Ah, love, you let dreams rise in colored clusters like balloons. The rushes parted; there I was, on a thick, blood-rusty river which seeped through sallow gray-shacked hills to flop like a worn rug over dams thrown up for public service, and puddle into stinking marshes quilled with rotting scrub. Intermittently along its length then, and I suppose still, it was crossed by crumbling concrete bridges bearing fluted black cast-iron standards tipped with milky globes boys used to BB as they cycled under. Fed by gullies, the Mahoning did not flow, it retched its journey. Susu, often have 1 watched you enter me to enter you . . . Weeds in many tuffets grew beneath the wires which fenced the factories, and crumbs collected in the cracks of the sofas. In 1928 we had carpeted the stairway; everything that year was new. At gates the workers put out pickets, and police patrolled. I imagine—isn't it true?—that you never wore panties, that your fur piece
       showed through your skirt like the print of a damp hand. Wine-eolored shirts and patched sheets hung between the houses in a boiling haze. Chinese scenes had been drawn on the waxed shades, and small bulbs burned there above metal chains which were linked like a slow drip to the light. Welcome to Warren—to Niles—to Girard—to Youngstown—to Campbell—to Struthers, Ohio (when taken together, more than 280,000 people now)—one end of a gut which shits in Pittsburgh and is sick along the way in Aliquippa, Bessemer, Beaver Falls, and New Castle, Pa. Here burning steel has replaced the sun, and twilight begins in the morning. Welcome, eventually, to Hammond, Whiting, or Gary . . . welcome to Wheeling . . . river, lake, and watertank towns where there are oil and gas cans big as buildings, shouting chimneys, and track after track of almost endless, nearly moving, trains. Sing into the smoke. Is the cellar where I tunnel anything like the rough halls where you worked? You were so thin, yet your voice was not a whistle. Low like something oozing from a gasket. Gypsy, the Germans said, and they cut off your beautiful singing head, though they had used, admired, and loved you and your crimes. The high schools play their football Friday nights; plumes of steam rise from tall out-steepling pipes; the sidewalks crack as a matter of course; fall trees lose their leaves as everywhere they do; and my mother opens the oven door to warm the kitchen in the morning. My father loved to paint bathrooms; he loved, especially, to do trim: fine black lines around the panels of the doors, lemon-yellow baseboards, light blue walls with a hint of sunset in the ceilings. Such was the indifferent divinity of Susus singing that she sang always out of her own earshot; no one was watching when she undressed, even her mirrors were empty; and on the medicine chests in a dozen houses where we lived, my father did, as he firmly said, a dandy job. When all the cracks had been covered with paint the landlord would sell the place, and then we’d move. Each of these towns has acrid, yellow-tasting cloud machines, ink-streaked, redly echoing skies, and torches one hundred feet high, burning constantly like sacred flames, discrediting the phallus as a symbol. There are piles of crates and heaps of barrels, mountains of bent, corroding metal And the bracelets on your slender arm slid, Susu, when your hand flew up to calm your hair. New streets fell across old meadows like a lash. The automobiles of the workers were pastured in gray grassless lots, while the houses of the workers, each the same, had been lured into straight unshuffling lines like people on welfare waiting for their boons. 1 remember mostly litter, derelict cars, scarred signs, lost ground, high-tension towers which imprisoned the sky, pretending to lift vast units of electric across the valley like skiers on sagging wires ... and all the residues of combustion: 1 remember rust, grime, glaciers of gray slag, acres of cinders, coal smoke, acids, oiled earth. Everywhere, too, there were pits and
          gashes, scooped-out hollows and thrown-up works . . . works—works, mills, plants—yes, by such names we invoked them. I don’t know how many freight cars and cranes were occupied there; how many tons of coke and quenching oils and iron ore were daily needed; how much silicon, sulfur, and phosphorus were used to produce that thick, unbreathable, stench-stained, stinging, lungeating yellow air—how many men, tools, trucks, and bales of wire—or by how many degrees the furnace fires raised the temperature in the valley to create a new climate. Close to coal and water, near the necessary limestone, the whole area was soon like an unwiped crack, crammed with ovens and machines for smelting metal, and men marched to them every day as docilely as Jews. (Youngstown tripled in twenty years.) And the gray figures of the coons, like their shanties, misshapen, in toeless shoes and dyed sacking, their nigger-eyes globes the boys burst, were, whenever I saw them, grouped on sloping porches where they sat for photographs which Marxists might have taken had the shines on them been white. At factory gates the workers fought police and struck at scabs with sticks. I, a Kohler, grew my face and pit and prick hair in an open zoo of ghettos—yes, it was all free to the public. There were the wops, the Polacks, bohunks, Greeks, the kikes, the subordinate nations, the micks and other anti-Semites—even then the heinies hated hebes (the Youngstown of the twenties was a quarter foreign-born) . . . and the Greeks went to their restaurants, the Italians to crime and the wholesale grocery, the Jews to finance of lowly kinds, watches and jewelry, the blacks to their push brooms, and the Poles to the furnace. What was Herschel doing, Herschel the hushed and hidden, the little person who defends the little people? Come out of your office, Herschel, old friend and colleague. Face the multitude. Be a pope on a balcony. We would drive through the shanty and ramshackle sections—my father, my mother, and 1—and I would sing hit songs in the backseat while we saw the sights: Republic Steel in eruption maybe, smoke orange as hair combed out in the sky, or suddenly the slick blue kind, thick and knotty, like bullet grease; and perhaps we’d see some pickaninnies, their heads spiked by tight braids tied with red bows (so cute, so sweet, my mother said), or underclothes roped out to dirty in the light—and I do try to remember my mother as something better than the dump of a hamper, but it's as though my father had painted that part of my past one of his bathroom hues—or while 1 sang “Ain’t Misbehavin’ ” for the laughs there’d be a derelict shoveled like rubble against a fence or possibly something obscene scribbled on a grime-glazed window or a billboard peeling comically the way my father's scowls made my eyes sore and sickness flaked from the household walls like paint: what the hell is the use of such a life if you can’t have mashed potatoes in the morning and a good fuck at night? At least I climbed out of the smoke, even though it gets so cold in Indiana some-
       times snow spews up behind a car's wheels just like summer's dust. We went to see the sights where what one threw away in the street—an apple core or fist of paper, a bottles brown body—became its only decoration, though now and then within a window there would bloom a dim geranium, also on relief, although in June, in vacant lots or on worn scraps of lawn, dandelions would briefly burn themselves to seed—gray quickly, shatter soon—like everything else. We drove brick roads which winter heaved as if there were something alive in the earth beneath them, though in this poisoned land I already knew there couldn’t be. Across the Midwest, John Dillinger motored openly from bank to bank—while 1 grew up—a hero like the Babe; racketeers shot one another in the street, or bombed bars, while floods overturned whole towns and left them ass-up in the silt.
         Otherwise 1 never went there. Instead—on stunted avenues and boulevards and drives which huge oaks shadowed so successfully that one could scarcely see the sky—I lived a shaded life. The trees were full of squirrels. I tamed two, and taught the lame one (which 1 called, with a child’s indifference, Oscar) to poke for peanuts in my pockets. A newspaper folded under his arm (the airmailed Times), Herschel wiggles his mustached lip and crosses the wall like a fly. Who would notice it, but me? Susu’s breasts are no bigger than bruises. My mother’s gray hair smears her face, and the men with the stretchers look puzzled. Why? What worries them, I’d like to know; they have the simple job of ambulancing bodies dead or alive, there’s nothing to it, death doesn’t pass a day by, and the work is quiet: tip the subjects into handy slings, open a pair of shiny-handled doors, and shove the rollered sick inside. Poor Tabor shook so his sheets flagged. Solemn ladies on white feet stood around with watches while he leaped from one death’s edge to another. Otherwise I never went there. His teeth no longer snipped the seconds into little lengths, and I don’t need to remember that they took my mother’s teeth, too, before they threw her in the drunk tank. You'll not leave me there, Billy dear, will you? And the elevator covered its toothless grin to swallow UP mother with a hydraulic hiss. Herschel always hovers on the brink. My brink. Not his. He is about to unfold his paper; he is about to stand, or speak, or cross the room; he is about to haul open a door through which I shall enjoy his disappearance, unless of course he thinks better of it, and I can observe him now about to think better of it . . . Yes, he is about to suggest I give the little men less blame. I shall remedy that defect, Herschel, exactly as you suggest, I reply cheerfully, and Herschel pinks perhaps a trifle. I m too cheerful. He sees no seriousness in me. It’s only for a little while, mother, while they get you well, and teach you how to chew without your teeth and sit nicely on a chair in the corner, mother; soon I shall come and get you; shortly I shall fetch; certainly 1 shall visit: fruit, chocolates,
          and flowers shall spill from my lap when I part my knees; sweets for the sweet shall proliferate there as on a fertile hillside, say in Tuscany, while I keep them knocked; and I’ll imagine many letters to you in my youthful tongue which the matron will deliver when you’re back from shock; when they’ve thrown your brains, like squids, in a box; and with the help of their silent thunder volts— yes, with one pun the past has been blacked out until you’re dumb enough again, Peg, to relearn the language of fruits, sweets, and flowers, the relative amounts of nickels, dimes, and quarters . . . though you’ve never been to Tuscany, Margaret, have you? or slept in the Algarve on the hot rocks? not even for a moment, on a visit, not even once before your pins, combs, curlers, glasses, teeth, your purse, rings, belts, snaps, coat, and clothes went off on a trolley, your veins burst, so they tell me, and the blood leaked out like air. Herschel pinks perhaps a trifle. Still, he persists—unusual for Herschel. it’s only . . . it’s merely, he says . . . it’s just . . . It’s just that otherwise, unless my parents take those roads on their Sunday drives, I never go there. I never went to funerals, either, when anyone died. 1 nearly didn’t go to Margaret’s—which you could say, since I’d arranged it, was my own. All those simple ordinary men, though, Herschel says, the small ones who supported Hitler, maybe they had little chance . . . little chance to see, to understand . . . were poor men in a poor position. I detect a possibly thoughtful squinch. My hands clench. I want to be as if invisible, like the Marquis de Sade, or like Susu, hidden even from myself, for then 1 could enjoy everything, including Herschel, whom 1 should like to kick, commencing with his shins. The sofa was so green, though there were slow bald patches where we often sat. If you had been a stick my father'd flung down the beach, Peg, then perhaps I would have seen it as a son’s function in nature’s scheme to run, wagging, after you; but he let an embalmers funnel suck you down, or a dark hall damp as a worm, oozy as an asshole. When I tossed a nut to Oscar, I tossed Oscar, don’t you see? In that way we’d have both been thrown. He persists—unusual for Herschel. Perhaps I’d have left sorrow's side to tend yours. The others, though, he says, men of power and education, weren’t some of them important to the Nazis too? I wonder (Herschel wonders; in his breast pocket, fingers fish for something, and he pauses; he’s about to go on, but not quite) ... I wonder, he says ... I wonder. . . Since I frequently put the peanuts where Oscar would be sure to get them, out of the reach of fleet Achilles, the cripple found himself in chance possession of a characteristic which favored his survival. You must think of it, William, as a disease, like measles or the mumps. Yes, Doctor. Thus we must attack it—in the modern way. We must. Yes, Doctor, yes, I quite understand as a glandular contretemps. Now remember: were not to let this get us down. No, Doctor. We must pick ourselves up and make a beginning; you must tell me: who was the passive partner in your parents’ marriage? Should I be sympathetic
      with the sick if I'm the sickness they are sick from? Does that seem natural, Doctor? does that seem possible? does that seem right? We slid off along our thighs when we stood up, smoothing the mohair the way water does and leaving the sofa behind us like a green rock relinquished by the tide. I wonder how
      (Herschel wonders how) their culture—how it happened that their culture_
      they were cultivated, just as we are, more so, weren't they . . . ? We, Herschel? We? What’s this? do you have little visions in which you are a man of power and education, in which you spin wines for a knowledgeable nose? Nevertheless, I say nothing; 1 nod, grin; good for me. Courage, Herschel, courage. But what daring in this worm to crawl up me! If I could once have dug my paws in the soft sand . . . If you had been a beach ball, I should have let my tongue loll and given chase, why not? At least my father could have given me some sun to be a slave in. Funny to fetch you back to him, though. Here, mom, have another bite from the dog that bit you. Everyone is comical, Herschel—tragic, Herschel—fat, Herschel—thin. Oh, a classical education they had indeed, Herschel—they moved their bowels daily in homage to the Greeks_and all the
      eligible refinements, yes, they had them: high ceilings, the best academies, tas-seled draperies, the lessons of the church, very old cognacs, fine china, the noble example of a noble army, tailored clothes and well-bred horses, books bound in rich indented leather. . . and I imagine myself as Mad Meg on the march, trampling Herschel into history from below like a fleeing road beneath a fleeing army ... or those of a more constructive twist, Herschel—practical men—what of them, the engineers, astrologers, and scientists? Men of every kind, yes: conductors of great orchestras, philosophers and lawyers, clergymen and architects, medicine men and nose-close students of our human health, soldiers (we’d expect that—hard-pricked Junkers, made of medals, we’d expect it), and heartless businessmen, growing rich on munitions and the rags and gold teeth of the Jews (no surprise there, our cliches confirm it), but what of all those firm-minded professors who burst into flame like a match when they were scratched, eh? Do you suppose some study might disclose a redemptive occupation? some work of mind or hand which made a man of you, which so ennobled those who engaged in it that they early took a righteous stand and died a martyr, say in ’38, after only a year or two of boys’ school, summer camp, and catechism? How Nazi were the shepherds, milkmaids, carpenters? . . . Ah, of course, carpentry . . . it’s the redeeming occupation. How Nazi was anybody? 1 have Herschel’s image: pale, grave, listening like that dog to its Victrola. Just how many tramps—aside from Charlie Chaplin—shook their fists? Berliners always claimed to hate him. The city was too sophisticated—wasn’t it? to be taken in by such a simpleton. North, east, south, or west—poor fellow, he hadn t a friend. Or should we join the ladies? There’s a fair proposal. Susu, 1 approach you in my dreams. You lived on as the crack in them all. In
           dear old Margaret, my melted mother, mad as medicine could make her, who used me to murder her, you resembled the lipped glass neck of a bourbon bottle; in my wife, my Martha, now as dangerous to travel on as the dirigible she's shaped to sail like (sane, though, sane and selfish as the turkey buzzard)—in Martha all the entrances are mouths; while in Lou (stale loveloaf), who both beckoned and received me like the bottom of a precipice, you’re the emptiness after the cliff’s edge. Oh yes. I tell you, Herschel, so many of the sweet sex sucked the cock of war, wet their cunts when the drums rolled and came for a saber, that there were many who wished, at the war’s end, to take the vote away from women in West Germany. You see, the ladies were so creatively cruel that the male mind fell behind and showed the white feather; they were such fanatics, loyal to their Fuhrer—that stupid loony little fart-loud pallid puff-and-pastry-painting fatherfrigger—to the last (ah, Herschel, no mistake, they still are), they made the sunrise seem inconstant; and it outraged German men to be outdone at anything so essentially—so basically—so determinedly—Boche. No, Herschel, no. A noble now and then, a high-placed politician, preacher, occasionally a writer—fled, and then they thumbed their noses. Ah, they warned us! They were all experts then, these noble men. But how often is it, Herschel, that they fail to fool us; that we can see they had misjudged the time, backed the wrong horse early, were therefore marked, and could not on any count, with any cunning or connivance, have convinced their new king of their loyalty? Whether they were little men or big ones doesn’t matter, don’t you see . . . ? I think he is a very stupid student—Herschel. Oh, he’s open to me (doesn’t dry ground welcome water?), but he’s small and tight and stubborn— hardpan—just a scratch below the surface. Yes, he persists. My god, I am writing this book about Germans, otherwise I never go there. Come to my rescue, Susu, slender singer whom 1 loved. And now the first verses have been sung and the whole hall is silent for the singing except for a clink or occasional cough and Susu in yellow or green or red flutters like a scarf, trembles like a flame in a sudden draft while all our smoke rises like string, until she’s still too, and speaks the middle verse in a pale low-level voice:
                            Now the spider requires to seize its prey,
                            and suck its life like a frosted shake,
                            lines which will cany across the day,
                            though its surface is steep and unsafe as a lake,
                            but I can only stare at their maneuvers,
                            and sniff out the cunt of a love I’ve misplaced,
                            for I fear my tongue’s been caught in its louvers,
                            and the name of my house and my dog is disgraced.
      Listen. Herschel, whether they had the solemn opportunity for sainthood doesn’t matter, either—their craft or professions, the weight of their purses or their brains, their social position ... all of no account. I have Herschel's image. Herschel s ghost and Herschel s image are the same. Stauffenberg is the name you’re trying to remember. Count Claus von Stauffenberg, the colonel who tried to blow up Hitler with a British bomb in his brand-new briefcase . . . and who bungied the job. Blah. What a bunch. By that time Susu’d been divided like a conquered country. By that time daddy's bones had begun to close as petals do out of the sun, and mama was buying her bourbon like buns from the bread man. Gin later, when short on funds. I’ve forced the English for the rhyme. “Suck its life like a cold parfait”? That rhymes with ‘day’ but spoils the scheme. Shake is as out of place as a condom on a canary, doesn t Culp say? ’Maneuvers’ and ‘louvers’ will have to go. ‘Shifts’ and ‘lips’? Susu lost her lips, chewing the thumbs of those Jews—licked them away like a ring of chocolate. Well, if he hadn’t been losing the war, the Fiihrer wouldn't have had an eardrum drummed but by praises. Holla! rat a tat tat Hurrah! rat a tat tat Holla! The whole high command hung fire, you might say, wondering which way they should jump, hoping Santa Claus had got him, but concerned only for their skins. The fatherland—my glass eye! Coup d’etat by phone. If there’s going to be a revolution, General, I’ll ring you up, and then, maybe, you’ll issue a few sympathetic orders. Um, the general says, maybe ... in exchange for a case of schnapps. The entire plot was reactionary—Jesu! you can’t think how churchy,
      incomparably Prussian, and superbly independent of the people—parties_al-
      l*es anyone at all outside the club. 1 planned no overthrow myself. I figured that, in time, mom and dad would die of their own dirties, decompose. My plot took patience, firmness, inner resolution, hate, of course; however, most of the colonel’s gallant supporters were strung up while still running away, and this, mind you, was in 1944, not in ’36 or 38 or 40, not even in 42, when it might have done some good, but when the end was only hours off and not even the mad were any longer blind. What a pitiful display they made, too, before the People's Court. The crooks they roped at Nuremberg, by and large, did better, i’ll tell you what helped, though, Herschel ... I mean, to stand firm—to hold on—to live through—endure, resist—to retain a little decency despite the climate of the cages, of the camps ... It helped to have a crazy living in you, a fanatic—to be nuts in another direction, be a Jehovah’s Witness, say, isn’t that a hoot? But read the books, Herschel, there are hundreds on the subject; there are nearly as many books as massacres. Still, he persists, for he believes the little people to be powerless . . . that’s what makes them little ... so when evils done its never their doing ... as if being powerless were without sin . . . when there is scarcely any greater one . . . and when some good is accom-
           plished . . . then the many have made themselves matter ... oh la! Gnaw his cock. Susu! Peck out his eyes! History hasn't room for heroes like you, Her-schel, all the space is taken, the stalls are occupied, you’ll have to go back to the storybooks; and when villainy is epidemic, villains scarcely matter either, as if we should care which flea bore what portion of the plague to Paris. I have seen hate in an undusted mirror elevate the glass like a swollen foot in a carpet slipper. Susu, 1 approach you in my dreams. No special permit is required for such perceptions. How long has history been hidden from you, Herschel? I’ve sat at a dinner table as wide and savagely policed as a death strip. I’ve been in bedrooms as bad as Belsen. Why must I study Germany? when there is nothing really German about me? Oh yes, except for that—my studies—I would never go there. Or were men different under Stalin? Are they otherwise in the soft towns and crossroads of our South? in the dark crowds of the Northern cities? Is there a redeeming place or nation? an ennobling institution? a kindly fireside, a humble hearth? Susu, I approach you in my dreams. Good men, Herschel? oh, the world is full of good men, good men with their good backs turned, who spend their whole lives safely rubbered over while they remedy our wounds, the way the surgeon’s hands stay sterile in his gloves. Susu . . .
                            Shall we sing to the stickum on the thread? the hole we hang in like the fly?
                            There’s only suction there to dread, not the chain’s drench or bowl’s cry.
                                  No arctic tern or ocean plover will light on me when it’s all over, and I go mad in a month;
                            for I shall be so bloodless and so dry, spiny as a blessed thistle, whatever these creatures occupy my soul shall blow through like a whistle.
                                  Fire, air, earth—0 lover— the animals are taking over, and I shall be mad in a month. I I
             I trilled hit tunes to the tires’ hum, my mother’s eyes waited on their washing like soiled plates wait their cleansing suds, slowly my father took the stairs, crying shit every step despite the thick carpet, cursing the help at his elbow and
      shivering with pain, Like the Sun King, Herschel, I didn’t want to see it; I hated their dirty pictures; why couldn't they carry their afflictions with an endearing cuteness like my crippled squirrel? why couldn’t they die, if they had to, out of my sight, away from the Court, away from the Kingdom? bury their bellyaches along with their bellies in some suitable box, perhaps beneath the peaceful springs and mattress of my maiden aunt, who kept there the lingerie no lover would ever look at, as well as quiet piles of pretty Christmas paper she admired enough while it was costuming a gift that after she had seen it painstakingly unwrapped—ribbons undone and seals snapped—she carefully pressed it flat to store in neat stacks under her sleep, as though, rescued from use and waiting like the lingerie for the right eyes, it might be worn once more at her dream daughter’s wedding, or, on another yuletide, dress a cheap ring like a royal jewel. Come to the head of the stairs, do . . . and count all the prints on the banister where desperate hands have seized it, or see the time my mother fell on her water-laden rump going to answer the door, in a nervous hurry because she believed it might be the breadman with her booze, it’s still there like a bruise on the runner; and there are several fine examples 1 could show you of looks so angry the air smokes in the right light yet, as well as corridors where loathing has nearly clogged the passage, and I can still find a few scars from those early years in the normally ignored or rarely haunted corners of the dwellings wed adopted then, in unusually low, lonely, or elevated atmospheres (we were not a tall family and did not, as a few do, tend to go on tiptoe when we shouted, or, in hate or rage, to stretch out, but rather, if anything, our habit was to contract, to shrink within or coil up, becoming thinlipped, narrow-eyed, dip-cheeked, tight-skinned, and somewhat bent____the
      whole of us, you might say, formed a fist—then, too, it was in our nature to spit our words out, hiss, or grind them between our teeth—break them to bits as the sledge shatters stones and shower them on our enemies by handfuls_sel-
      dom did we use the full, round tones of the drum and bugle, the doggie-like yelps of the skittish and callow, or the stagy screams of those who wish to impress the neighbors with the glitter, merely, of their razor, not the size of its slice; and since, of course, we never fought on our hands and knees or fucked on the floor, you’d scarcely find there any interesting shards of our ferocities); yes, 1 can still sometimes discover the remains of especially bitter outbursts like the dents of kicks, dislikes which took their owners by surprise, sour and sudden as a belch may be, inspired blurts you would have to call them, since they relied for their effect upon a freshness of realization, an orgasmic intensity which is quite foreign to the more ornate, malicious, and reflective styles that have, for the most part, covered over and replaced them; indeed, this country innocence—like the honest naivete and pungent directness of Punch
           and Judy shows, permitting us to enjoy the primitive response of bruise to blow—these spontaneous but crude expressions of angry passion, like old scythe sweeps we might encounter in a field long fallow and left to sheep, although they have to strike us as superior in their simplicity and ease of maintenance to the modern mower's nervous teeth, they must at the same time seem further from us now than the mule from the motorcar or air-raid siren from the human scream (of another natural order, that is—as if fallen from another world); yet we have to realize, nevertheless, that these thoughtless rejoinders were actually the origin and often the continuing inspiration of the crudest and most artful gestures our civilization has so far contrived, inasmuch as the various combatants (time sliding forever frontward as it tends to, and each learning, little by little, the lessons that, these days, only life in the family can fully provide) began to acquire the character of the true artist: ah, began—Anfang ist schwer, aber die Ubung macht den Meister; they made a start: they began to achieve a ruthlessness, for one thing, that was eventually so divested of all nobility it would seize any advantage which came its way, make any mark it could if only a scratch, crow over every victory as if each were the conquest of a continent, grudge every defeat as if it were the most meanly contrived and ill-deserved bad luck a good sport ever suffered, and, of straws, the longest and the last; in addition they began to command in themselves a contempt for the easy way—a scorn they could fire like a cannon—which would disdain to draw its energy from the flash but hold on to its heat through a lifetime of labor and dedication—nurse it and fan; so that their behavior began—ah, it began, by and by—to display (as we might expect) that careful preparation, that resourceful attention to detail, that patient, cunning choice of moment, that continuously masked intent, those cleverly counterfeited feelings, and above all that faithfully kept chronicle of grievances, spurious beliefs, and lies which together comprise every symptom, we know, of a long-standing, practiced, and habitual spite—an antagonism which no longer depends on any elements of love or trust it may betray in its object, but proceeds against the same deep dislike and suspicion, the same history of injury and disappointment, the same slow rage, it finds in itself: that of the long-trapped animal whose moves, by now, have figured a path of restlessness on the floor of its cage as regular and abiding and apparently as peaceful as the quiet pacing of the planets—inflicting its wounds when it can on a well-warned and shrewdly defended enemy then, on one so knowing and so like itself its as though animal and bars were to interchange or the prisoners run the prison, as if the wound were to become the weapon, and the pain penetrate the very leather of the lash to rush through every passage which the hide contained when it was skin; and bring to blood again, in this unusual way—scar, jinx, cripple—the designs,
      plans, plots, and patterns of the past. No wonder we admire these beautiful old artifacts; they have a handsomeness which only hate in the hands of the artisan will take the pains to grant. Nothing we have thrown up in stone, Herschel, not even cathedrals so peaked their columns cloud, not even glass so stained the light is permanently sunburned by it, has the shape or dye these looks and voices in their ancient traces have. How often does our history hold a candle to them, even dimly illuminate the hole the hanged man makes in the air, the garrote wire in the shape of a whistle? Ghosts, that’s what we call them, ghosts ... in our confusion . . . when it's the cabbage in the soup, the buttered toast, the unlaced shoe, the bouffant hair—it's the hand, but not the hold it has, which is the wraith; it is my father who will one day vanish without a trace, just as 1 shall, Susu has, and you will, too, Lou, vanish . . . vanish . . . but not the shake he gave me April twelfth, a shake which rattled every window in me—and wasn’t I a world of windows, for he began to calcify while still alive until now he must be chalk and flour on the floor of his underearth igloo; Susu herself, began dividing as she devoured those Jewish thumbs, her neck pulling thin like taffy every lustful lick, but did she put a passive look on when she sucked, or was it more a weenie one has roasted open on a stick, to be swum at like a shark with open jaws? (1 say he’d been a Santa Claus indeed if he had killed him, that Stauffenberg.) Ah, no, since I have seen an idle ambling dog gnaw at the remains of a fish it’s nosed up on the beach, I know the look that Susu had on at her feast, it was just as it was when she sang in her cafe the crow’s song, and I clouded my coffee and hindered my knees to dream toward her image (I say our topmost men are pond scum, Herschel, that’s my opinion; the rest of us have sour blood, we’re dregs, we silt the bottom, we should be poured out), so I buried my nose in the foam, lowered like the dog did my eyes to the fish, the lap of my body, there the beak of the crow—oh how well you know me—and dreamed toward her image, an image which belonged in the same space as that April shake or the doors which closed on my mother's face, not Hamlet’s father’s ghost, perhaps, but Banquos at the very least, and not the Weird Sisters, either, but their spells, make history, Herschel, which takes no note of the hole the hanged man makes in the air or the shake I shook ... in our confusion we aren't clear ... not the unlaced shoe, the bouffant hair—it's how the fabric feels, and where in history do you find that? the fear the shake shook through me, the way his head swam in my gaze as he shook and 1 was shaken? so that later on in life, when the quake took Magus Tabor and his sheets shivered as though they were white with frost and crisp from cold, I thought of his sickness as my father’s arms at his shoulders, manhandling him, while my head bobbled and my mouth moved as Mad Meg’s was to chitter during those final hours, trying to say what neither of us ever wanted to hear said
             (like a sparrow or a swallow in the sound of it) and once said would remain hammered into him as if he were a brass plate and my cry the inscription—so it would seem written back at me—
                                             Dr. Kohler
                                                Nazi
                                          By Appointment
               —very dignified, and worn like he wore his nose, as if it had been there longer than the rest of him, for, Herschel, where does the slate sea go when it has filled a Greek eye for a whole day (Thucydides doesn’t say) and the wakes of the boats lie still in the waves like paths to pasture? where does the Greek gaze go when the lines run away from the boat like cracks in the water and fish are drawn up through the gray sea as though brought up through gray stone? no, normally he wouldn’t touch me, never, he would simply fix me with a stare like a steel stake, yet that day passed as all the others have, since on the following morning the wind shattered the water, bouncing the boats like horses tugging at tethers, the sun fell in gleaming showers, and the green floor of the ocean rose and lay on its mottled surface like a bather, thus creating one more condition which Thucydides passes over, for consciousness is not a character in history, Herschel, had you noticed? that most fragile and translucent of screens, that most rapid and forceful of hidden rivers, is a floating web, really, of the most delicate connections, I’ve heard it insisted, that that shadow show, strand-ambling animal, that sugar-seeking fly or carrion crow, that Scandinavian movie, sea worm, linear design—flat, intricate, and passive as a Persian carpet or as lilied, calm, and public as a park pool—is a soft fog, frosted window, log fire, mill wheel, set of steps, a flower-filled and beerbelabored meadow; is as hot, aglow, and runny, it is claimed, as molten metal; is the sun; is smirched paper, so some say, a bubbling kettle, spittled wall, or boarded well, imagine those, and then—twee wheel—a dancing bear, the daily paper, a small box riven with silver wires—no—but one of those eruptions which take the lives of people on the other side of the world; it’s any cornered creature or the chuckling gull; it’s dark tubes and tunnels, overdecorated skies, a plate of pastries, an ocean on which it’s been raining; it’s a pigeon coop, fall trees, mirrors, and a German band, gay, loud, and martial, like children wading; or it’s obscene underthings, old albums, stoppered bottles, basements, closets, attics, pulsing coals; it's incessant little dents in clay, wax, or pillow—this soul, this spirit— and consider how a slip, dripping on the white enamel bottom of a bathtub, slowly sings the earful; yes, it’s said it’s cliffs with crumbling edges or it’s paths up mountains; it’s snick, pouf, whish! illumination: lanterns, flashlights, beacons, tallow candles; it’s boxes under beds; it’s strings of beads or onions; it’s fireflies captured in jars—this wind harp . . . trembling; and it has a surface,
     don't they tell us? soft as a bog, a reaction—snick, pouf, vvhish—like a light coming on or a breeze springing up; it has an intention that's more murderous than any of the mantis's patient plans; it has a substance somewhat solider than the rainbow and a reach which is as looping and as long and, like a fluttering scarf, as colorful—yes; and does it not possess the fidelity of the weathercock? does it not emulate the flight of the bat, simulate the sounds of the dove, and imitate the habits of the snake? doesn’t it always write itself away like chalk? ah, Herschel, greedy as a grasshopper, wouldn’t you agree? sleepy as a sofa cushion, lecherous as a flea—as nip—as pop—this paradise of dreams and pharmacy of poisons, this veritable hail-rattle of events, Herschel, is not a character in history, no one considers how the wonder of our consciousness came about or is composed (a melting fresco gets a better press and more money can be collected to feed homeless cats); yet what have we made throughout our time together but just this, and haven’t you frequently felt your cock, bursting with juice like a grape, strain toward its dark oaky barrel? so my father would drive his swollen eyes into me and in a low cold voice, a voice so steady it must have taken all his energy to restrain it, when it wanted to be a leaping fish, in a slow monotonous voice so level it rocked, he would move in and out of me the way a knife cuts pie or a clock divvies silence, item by item, describing my worthless nature, tock-tock till he came, and the hairs of his nose waved like the feelers of a carnivorous plant, tick, and what have we heard from Herodotus on this pointr ha, Herschel you have already vanished, even now you leave no trace, yet I can see my own steps in the Woodbine Street house where I left them burning in the linoleum, and the closet where 1 hid from my father, crooked like an arm at the elbow, while he called out, Don't hide from me, you little snot! bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang the Jews were shot and how was any Jew alive to feel about a German or perhaps a gentile after bang bang bang bang and all that rot most were starved or gassed or shot, Planmantee said, we shall solve that, we are able, we shall create an international ghetto—call it, what a comedy, call it Zion—we shall surround it with Muslims, we shall sic the Jews on the Arabs, bang they may bang all they like at one another bangedy bang-bang, who will care? not my father who felt they were filthy as a South German should, not my mother who was suspicious as a North German should be, because they didnt drink enough to be normal, since normally he wouldn’t touch me, but this time he said I'm not going to hurt you whatever you answer, bang, he said, hanging on to my shoulders for dear life, just as Mad Meg beckoned to me though he shook like a town in Anatolia, saying son, my son, bang, he said I m not going to hurt you however you hurt me but you have never liked me, have you, you’ve never loved me the least bit (Tacitus, Herschel? he left it
           out), and now you believe 1 hate you, don’t you, bang you bastard, son he said, his words disassembled as fast as he spoke them, lettered up as if our anagrams were over, the bits swept off in jumbles to their box, Kohler, my boy, you will make a good German, you will make a good German, you will make a good German, and I think that even after he died he still flopped, his backside silver, with gaping mouth, loose dry spittle flaking from his lips like soap chips shaken from a box—and was I shaken out like salt on the wound my father was by that time?—well, the room he went to rest in was nothing like his life: clean, light, bare, nurses who were nothing to leer at, and those medicos that Magus Tabor hated so, trying to save his life by saying no, oh a good German? even though my brick passed through that Jew without a sound? so 1 said yes, my head snapping as his arms pumped (he still had that sort of strength), yes, boy! bang you bastard, yes, dad, yes yes you do, you hate me, you, you do, youdoyou, doyou dodad, and that’s what it was, a trinket, a bauble, no better than a bit of junk to jangle from a bracelet just as those wide-thighed girls in their tight skirts sat in class and jingled, teasing the prick of the prof, or Planmantee who shakes the change in his trouser pocket with his right hand while he talks, charms to ward off harm by hanging, though she ate those thumbs one after the other like cold cocktail sausages in sauce—the palm is the best portion—while 1 sang hit songs in the backseat: “Where Is the Lord the Ladies Love So?” and other hymns, and I think she would have stood on my chest in her bare feet if I had ever had her—if she had ever had me—and 1 would have looked up between the thin struts of her tepee to the dark tip where the smoke emerges, her hips turn chest neck face hair going up like a signal between savages, as she clenched her toes the way a cat closes a paw it’s just flexed—the palm is the best portion—and did 1 see any backseats among the sights 1 saw? no, so on his dying day and to his dying face I said there is nothing, there is nothing, I said, there is nothing genuinely German about me, and the rest of Susu is simply smoke her hole lets like light a fart out when you draw the bombing curtain, it’s her split speaking as 1 suppose her disembodied head still sang the crow song or the animals are taking over while her trunk like Magus Tabor in his final lecture and in his last labor fluttered like a beheaded bird, don’t the peasants say? when poetry has got their tongue, and the cameraman took pics of what they chopped—Magus did his dance before he died to music composed especially by Europe and did those girls have castanets for cunts? there was such a clang and rattle in my class—how dare!—their twats would tweet, bums bang—how dare!—bang bang bang bang bang bang the holes in them would hiss, my love, it was the bullet’s kiss, until you couldn’t hear myself speak—and I’ve one such snap in its smart blue gold-embossed travel case slid flat between sheets of burial data in my desk, otherwise 1 never go there, for
      didn't 1 do (since he had dubbed me sir, made me his heir) the right thing finally? pursue and overtake his chair to have it shipped from Germany, to carry on his work in the same seat of learning, and even nearly dedicate my book to him before on second and a better thought 1 crossed the dedication out? ho, by all the gods of history, what possessed me?
                                   T© MY fiKffWIIB
      The Lord Is Where the Ladies Love It, therefore, Herschel—if so, Herschel— then let him smite us all, march everyone to the ovens or turn us under to fertilize the onions, yes, Susu’s where I burn, a naked worm 1 go to her hole to be consumed (to shit shave shower, weren't they sent?) and so compose her jaws lips tongue teeth (the gullet of the gull is a good place, gulls, 1 have heard them, bleat like sheep), the crow's tune, Herschel,
                                  I once went to bed with a nun by pointing a pistol at one;
                                said she, with a quaver, that’s a good big persuader, but what is the point of the gun?
                                                                how well, you
      know, you know it knows me, aren't you my spitting image? and that is how 1 see things, as history should, certainly, as though it were a dogs nose, time a beach, because when 1 double back upon myself, I find these doubles—don’t you?—the way a dog discovers his owner in his owner’s clothes, sees itself in the clear mirror of its pee, for it catches a sniff as 1 might catch a glimpse, and there I am like a hard word or a blow, perhaps a little paler, stiff, and there is my father banging on the door of the closet with his still fistable fist (don’t you see, Herschel, in that fist already is the claw it will come a cripple to, so his hand will one day nevermore lie flat again but curl constantly like burning paper), and there my sentence is, my life stretch, hammered to him like a revolutionary placard to a tree—for good—to hang there: you hate me, and hung around the corpse of Magus Tabor, Professor of History for All Germany, my ID, like a warning drawn in crayon on criminals: there is nothing genuinely German about me, as if—from before—from now—from then on—they were to write out the message themselves, not to sail it toward me as my wife’s words sail sometimes, like paper planes, but to publish and order it like commands of the army, and I did sincerely and obediently believe for a long time that there was nothing genuinely German about Magus Tabor (there was nothing genuinely German about anyone), no, 1 never mentioned the matter, any more than it ever occurred to me to call my father a filthy Hun—he wasn’t—or my
             wife a lousy cocksucker—she was—even when he pulled me from my closet cave and safety tree: what are you doing in there, Billy? dreaming that Susu is standing on my shoulders like a Turkish masseur, her cunt a dark cloud coasting across the sun, even then it never occurred to me to call him our household Kaiser—he was—or my wife a tease—she wasn’t—or when he shook me (though 1 was no bough to be jigged through April, he was no breeze): why are you hiding from me, Billy? 1 am running away from home, dad, my belongings in a black bottle, 1 am escaping the camp, 1 am fleeing the country, pa, 1 am digging a tunnel quite as long as a chimney, I am outwitting my warders by wearing their views, 1 am breaking my parole then, spilling ink, and slipping by the guards in the guise of a girl, and it never occurred to me that 1 should need a wig on my womb—1 didn’t—or that escape would be the pastime of my life— it was—even when I sowed my seed in Martha’s mouth and she bore me my ill will forever, it never occurred to me that the Way In and the Way Out are the same, or why, for instance, the sea should be so celebrated when long gray gravel roads run neglected into weed and we lie near an open window in the deep hum of summer and slide in our sweat over one another like two seals, so there is only one Final Solution to the Human Question, Herschel: total war, no quarter, unconditional surrender, Heiligblitzkrieg, V-ABCDEFGHIJKLM-NOPQRSTUVWXYZ DAY . . . with dancing in the former streets.
                                Leopard, lion, come from cover, the animals are taking over, and I shall be mad in a month.
            Susu, 1 approach you . . .
                                   Sentenced to sentences . . .
                                                      And wasn’t the court horrified by
          the account of our crimes?
                           I’ve been condemned to continue . . .
                            No arctic tern or ocean plover will light on me when it’s all over, and I go mad in a month ...
           Didn’t it curdle the blood of the people? you cannibal, didn’t you harrow , . . What, the body? Herschel said, well, it’s like an aerial, you have to have one to pick anything up. What this, Herschel, I can’t believe—do you fancy yourself a funnybone? will you rub yourself shiny? which is soft shoe, which is trouser? Be my Valentine
                                for I shall be so bloodless and so dry . . .
      I have been condemned to continue till my life, drawn like a thread through the narrow eye of language, sews
           What do I want to do?                     [ want to kick Herschel.
      I want to break his teeth with the black shining nose of my boot. 1 want to boot and kick and kill and loot.
                     Fire, air,   earth—O     lover—
                               sews at least one belly to one button What do I want to do?                     I want to tie your ears to
      my feet, for I'm the messenger of the gods; I sing hit tunes in the backseat.
                                                          button, one fly to
      its feasting
           What do I want to do?                     I want to kick and kick
      and kick and kick and kick and kick and kick and kick and kick . . . feasting, and one wound to its weapon the animals are taking over,
                                          weapon
                     and I shall be mad in a month.
        Shall we lose sight, overlook, ever forget?
        Never.
        ... O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed.
        Ach, let things take their course, Herr Behlen said of History, 1 remember. In five years time nobody will want to hear about them or their cursed course. Susu, 1 approach you ... I approach you in my dreams.
                             Down and Dirty
       Last night I gave myself a good scare. Two scares actually. I nearly buried myself alive. I shall never forget the weight of that dirt on my back, the soft moan of the earth when the tunnel’s roof gave way, and my groan, too, as if the ground were in pain. I’ve still got gurk in my hair, and when 1 blow my nose, my snot blows black, I imagine like a miner’s. Moreover my hole was nearly discovered. Martha is away so much, 1 had gotten careless, tracking dirt to distant floors, disposing of loose soil too boldly, becoming lax about my appearance: allowing dust to show on my clothes, to darken the lines blue-roading my face, permitting telltale crud to cross my palms and to remain beneath these broken
           nails 1 am inspecting now with great distaste and no little anxiety, as if criminal acts were mapped out there like chains of lakes (what transgression would be handed the harsher judgment, I wonder: my tunnel or this text?); then my irritated eyes should be a giveaway, my cough, even my habitual crouch, that little bend to my back as if I had grown old in the wind, and my stiff sore knees, too, all the bruises which make my body into a billboard proclaiming the fact that “Something Down Is Up!” though, this time fortunately, it is a body at which even I no longer look; and of course there are also the messes in the basement which a makeshift neatness can scarcely disguise—drains clogged with clay, matted burlap, suspicious shavings, sawdust, scattered nails—the stockpiles of materials, too, not easy to conceal, digging tools, my absences while in the house, either because I’m writing up here or digging down there (I call my disappearances Herschelations), which ought to be mysterious but so far have failed to elicit even the mildest query.
              There she was, though, at the top of the cellar stairs, her arms full of irrelevant brochures she's about to bring down in a pair of paper bags. At one a.m.?
           I ask angrily, fearing I've been caught; well, I have been caught, just out of my dig suit, my face smeared with dirt still, my hair like dust bowl grass, my soul somewhere in my socks (since 1 cache my digging boots and ready tools in an old vegetable bin). Long meeting, she says through the bulk of the two grocery sacks she has filled her embrace with, way out now in advance of her chest so her short arms have to stretch, and I can smoothly suggest she transfer the bags to me, she shouldn’t try to carry such a burden down steep narrow stairs, I’d be pleased, anyplace in particular did she want them put? Okay, she says. It’s yucky down there. Yuckier than usual, I reply, hefting the load, and trying to turn around on a step as narrow as my escape. What’s in them? Leftover brochures—you know—old out-of-date folders about the museum. Anywhere. Okay, I say, with relief I must conceal, but relief which feels for the moment purely physical, like a bladder eased after a long and painful search. Then I realize that because the sacks were in front of her face she hasn’t seen me, but may glom me now lumbering toward the floor of the basement; god knows what the back of me looks like after the night I’ve had; it’s certainly easier concealing a simple adultery than this sandhog’s occupation; however, the door shuts without a significant slam and I seem to have ducked the collapse of my secret as well as survived the cave-in of my cave: i.e., being buried alive or flayed.
              So I tried to clean myself up a bit better before coming to bed, not that I need to worry that she’ll drop in to inspect me, to appreciate the ways all the small dirts which sweat sticks together seem to pack themselves into folds of fat where they uncannily resemble those nervously retraced pencil lines on a
      schoolroom desk, managing the matter under layers of clothes too, till the bellybutton really looks to be one, sewn with dark thread onto a creased and grimy pillow.
        1 didn’t know when I’d be able to get back to the dig—the routines of ordinary life are daily and damnable, those of the university equally stupefying— but I vowed to be more careful both inside the escape route and out: disposing of my burrowing clothes and tools properly, sweeping up and concealing the site, disposing of tunnel-shit safely by spreading it about in the garden, now that all the drawers of her commode, desk, bureau, and dresser collection have been packed with dirt like seedling flats. In particular, though, I had to be watchful about my person. 1 had been allowing too many stains to get by, and my hands were a sight, rough, scabby, and lineated, fingertips sore and nails fractured, patched with Band-Aids and darkened with iodine. It was certainly a lucky thing, right now, we slept apart, for I couldn’t have touched her with such raspy hands even in the dark. Touch her. Oh. That would give her a start. She would think she was being crawled on by a bug, a rapist, or a rat. After so long a length of absence. And especially now 1 had rid her of her cat.
        1 slide these sheets between the sheets of G & / and wonder when I’ll run out of history to hide in, or if I’ll be forced to double the center of the sandwich with another layer of ham. I guess it’s right that my secret life should lie inside them. Oddly enough, I have a similar problem with the offal 1 dig out of the rte. The clay is so damn yellow now that I’ve had to sink my second shaft in order to get under the gas lines. It comes out in heavy clumps, or almost like shavings where the pick slides down along the hardpan, tough as a trunk, and there’s no easy place to put the stuff. Earlier I could slip some into flower pots and beds around the house. I also covered up a lot with garden turnings, and even weighed the garbage down with dirt. Of course, a good deal can still be carried off in cartons in the car, but only when 1 can load the trunk and backseat in secrecy. The boxes have a habit of breaking apart, too, which has discouraged me with that method. There’s more moisture in the dirt than you think, so if a box sits a few days, its bottom's going to be soggy and the cardboard will most inconveniently unfold its flaps. Ideally, 1 need the same system I’ve always needed: a way to get rid of an evening’s digging on the evening of the work. Now I carry clay away from the face in pillowcases, and then, when Ive got to the trap, I dump each load in the coal scuttle till I can think of a place to secrete the stuff. Christ, it’s yellow as aspen, fairly shouts its presence, hardens into unmanageable chips, and doesn’t act a bit like earth. Which, I guess, could be an advantage sometimes. The loamier stuff I reserve to fill Marthas future furniture store, though I wonder whether the extra weight is safe on the second floor, because those pieces are huge and mahogany heavy,
           or built of an overload of oak already, and quite a few have deep pockets, seem like they could hold a ton, so the beams of this old house, big as it is, and big as 1 imagine they are, are getting a real workout.
             How could anyone have guessed, when Martha started collecting these mastodons, and filling all the hallways and spare rooms with unmerciful Victorian highboys and rustic rodeo wardrobes, squeezing light and air, not to say space, out of the house, as if she hoped that soon there’d be no room for me; yes, how could 1 have guessed that her dream of one day managing a barn full of antiques, and selling pieces of our Olden Days like pyramids to pikers, would take on this much measurable reality or become this menacingly residential; I can scarcely wigglesneak my ass or rubber my belly between the ugly bulks'which have taken up the upstairs landing and line the hall as if it led to a soup kitchen—she couldn't collect pretty earrings and pins, of course—no— or rare rag dolls, or even little figurines you could at least smash against a wall when enraged—if you kick one of these motherhulkers, you risk your toe—and then just to let them sit there, after all the trouble they required and provoked, undusted, you bet, undisturbed, for whowouldbelieveit years, enticing me to inscribe weird curses on the hazy wardrobe mirrors and other stretches of set-in glass the way “Wash Me" gets fingerwrit on the rears of trucks, with similarly futile effect, too, not even a scowl or a sneer or a smile or a nod to suggest she’d ever seen them; to ignore them as if they were invisibly familiar, even after young equally heavy men had muscled more chiffoniers up the stairs or into what was once a spare room, to pack them side to shoulder and knob to knurl, with twirly handles kissing curly spindles, so many footed with feetlike feet, too—hoofs or claws or paws—which ought to have drawn at least a glance of amusement—and with one, 1 think, taloned, as though the chifforobe were worn by an eagle.
             Now that I've put my dirt in her drawers, I feel differently about the furniture I’ve hated for so many years: the ugly bulk of each piece, the crowds of them, their vulgarly carved and treated woods, their out-of-date nicks; now I think of them as mausoleums, tombs where the burial grounds themselves are put to rest, where what never was alive has died—in a dresser, a hautboy, a bureau dusted with dust—each a chest of coffins for the clay we once were made of, the last casket like the last roundup, suitably housed in mission oak; and now, when 1 squeeze myself by them, I squeeze to my face a smile as long as paste. Sometimes—though only sometimes—things work out, and the going goes good.
             Martha rarely visits our “spare rooms,” and certainly never the attic, to gloat over her treasures or to pet their flanks, slide their drawers in or out as I would, study the forlornly funny face which appears in their discolored mirrors, or fol-
      low a whirl of woodgrain with a happy finger. None of that. She doesn’t even dawdle on the upstairs landing where so many sit. In bygone times, 1 went to the auctions where she bid and often bought them, but we would quarrel over their character, our need, their use, where we’d put them, their inherent worth, so 1 eventually stopped going along on her hunting expeditions, stayed home and tried to be absent when the heavy old hags were unloaded; period pieces hold little charm for me, ugly objects even less; they're not at all like ancient words which 1 might enjoy collecting, and words hardly bulk, even long ones, or draw dust, but then they can’t be resold either; which is what Martha always claims she aims to do: open a shop, sell these morose elephants at an enormous profit, go on journeys called “buying trips’’ not “buying jags,’’ create a career for herself; what the hell, why not, I say, worn out with wrangling, whatever you want, just leave me out; which is what gets well done, hereabouts, the leaving out; we rarely talk; we rarely argue anymore; we orbit at intergalactic rates, coming in sight of one another on ceremonial occasions like the return of a comet, otherwise by accident, and pursuing our surrogate passions as only those whose natural passions have been blighted can—with un-relievable and relentless desperation.
        Ironically, it was I, when the bite from this odd buying bug had just begun to itch in her psyche, who suggested she store her treasures in the basement. We d have to fix up the cellar door, presently decrepit, because the regular stairs were too old, unsteady, narrow, and precipitous; but that wouldn’t be terribly difficult,
      1 said, and then great commodes, or whatever, could be brought in easily, and put away like political prisoners out of the sight of the king; however, Martha wouldnt hear of it, far too damp, she said, warpage would occur, inlays would pop out, marquetry curl, veneers become venereal, u.s.w.; so instead the creatures marched upstairs and occupied what was soon a conquered country.
        The kids have continued to bunk together on account of her acquisitions, every spare room eaten like a chocolate, the guest bedroom as well, the walk-in closets, odd pockets under eaves, stairs, and dormers, now occupied by these woody charmers; although the boys don’t seem to mind, dashing between them like commuters, as indifferent to their presence as their mother, equally and always out—at school, with friends, on Boy Scout excursions, taken in tow by Culp, who will no doubt pull them through growing-up’s glandular perversions.
        Now I’ve a hole in the ground down there two stepladders deep, though presently its length is perhaps no greater than twelve feet, if you count the nose cone. Still I’ve got myself beneath the gas, water, and electric, the frost and sewer lines, and broken a bit past the edge of where the house sits on the lot, wholly free and clear of its domain; moreover the rte. had been scrieving pretty
           well, I was feeling a quiet elation, when the earth above me turned soft and fell like plop on my head, shoulders, and half-chest, up at the face of the dig, in the narrowest part, of course, not yet shored, because not yet enlarged, and not yet lit, either, in dumb damn dark, so 1 couldn’t breathe the awful air either, the sudden weight driving my nose into the clay with such force it began to bleed—god, what a stupid situation to be scared in—wondering what the hell, of all the places of this earth I could possibly be on (where I’d be safe as a Swiss bonbon, too, decorating a paper doily that’s shielding a silver plate) I was instead deep in dreadful dutch here, in an escape route of my own contriving which could go undiscovered for years, years after 1 had mysteriously vanished from home and haunts without a hint, apparently in reasonable health and at least not unsound mind, the hole as hid as my hidden text, and no next of kin likely to rescue—a la Rin Tin Tin—the private inventions on these pages from their tunnel into Time, or, at the last min, to pull these old bones and swaddled skin from the fallen walls of their previous owner’s runaway tunnel into HYPERBOLIX ESCAPE SPACE.
             Quashed was what 1 was. But what shook my head loose was the dirt in my eyes, which was worse than being breathless, worse than being quashed. I was scared I was about to be a stiff. I was ashamed I had been so suicidally stupid. Yet none of these feelings were galvanic. Instead, I instantly, quite wordlessly, realized there was dirt in my eyes, under the lid, against the ball, against eye-white and iris, against the soft wet wall where I met the world—who cares about being dead when there’s dirt in your eyes—and my head rocked from side to side as if it were a bag punched, and I pulled back by pushing against the end of the tunnel with my hands, shivering violently along my length like a plucked wire, earth in my eyes—hell, my bloody nose was nothing—there was dirt in my eyes; and then suddenly 1 had retreated into the ladder, 1 must have felt it against my boots, so I buckled my knees, my ass rising behind me, screwing myself round to climb the five steps, bleeding too, but O that was the least of it, the blood removing the earth from one nostril at least, yet with dirt in my eyes, my mouth too—yellow clay—1 could taste my chew as I wriggled up the first five horizontal feet to ladder number two, the shorter one, and crawled gasping and cursing in no time 1 suppose out of the trap to stumble my way to the laundry tubs and their goddamn rust-stiff taps where I tried to get the water to run over me like a rock beneath its fall, not with much luck, and batted my bare eyes at the stream, weeping, 1 think, while washing, my nosebleed in well-marked subsidence, though that’s why I blew black snot from my nose when I blew it—no wonder—fluttering lashes like a lovely, showering my sight until the pain began to ease, and when it eased . . . while it eased ... I huddled on the basement floor, babybabbling, wrapping my knees, water leak-
       ing down my shirtback to the belt, softly bawling, a sight, I remember thinking, as if a Culp had come upon me, for sore eyes.
         1 figured 1 d have to wear BVDs when winter came. The frozen ground, its cover of snow, would make disposal difficult, unless I flung my clay chips about in a blizzard, one sort of flake fooling the other. Maybe 1 was so weary of this work by now I wanted out of it, and would be happy to be discovered, hauled back to my cell, put in solitary, given sexless bread and water; maybe.1 thought that would be better than lying full length along that everywhere narrow path and pushing a few shavings of clay back by my sides to below my waist and then inching rearward in such a way the clay came too like rolls of erasure, until space permitted my cupped hands to heap it into the pillowcase so I could pull it up and out of the hole and into the scuttle, punching the dirt down with my fist, though you could scarcely call the clay dirt, it was something else, yellow pencil shavings, the petrified puke of ages past; but someday 1 had to hit loam or real earth or soft mud, something a little sandy, so the work could progress at least by feet and not by inches; 1 tried to have that hope; I remembered all the books I’d read about escapes, from jails and dungeons and camps, about the long weary secret nights of scraping and scratching, the wondrous holes which had been dug with bent nails, a bit of sharp stone, single spoon, can lid, penknife, and how tin cups had hauled off handfuls of the way out, until there was a way out, and didn't I want a way out? O sure, sure, in the worst way, but I was certainly discouraged, well before the cave-in, before Martha and I had our peaceful business with the brochure-packed bags, so my god now what? how can 1 continue this comedy? 1 was faltering, then, no question, 1 had forced myself into that damn pit time after time, putting my nose into a most solidly obnoxious nothingness, the ground hugging my head like a helmet, breathing only the skinny air which got by my shoulders and crept past my collarbone, O everything was so claustrophobically close, so stifling not merely to the nose but to the spirit, yet my suffering was to what effect? by now? and 1 read how others had gotten rid of their rubbish, carrying it out into exercise yards in socks beneath their pants, and in pockets, sifting it evenly onto the ground they jumped around on, spading it, sometimes, into gardens, hiding it—who would dream?—in attics, under floorboards, in waste cans, between studded walls; but in those cases there d be a digger who'd play “God Save the Queen" on his harmonica, and there would be lots of jolly chaff and cheerful jokes, camaraderie to keep you going, whereas 1 didn’t even have myself; 1 was more alone than the Count of Monte Cristo, who at least knew that an honorable lineage made royal his rags; 1 didn’t dare grow a beard; 1 didn’t dare fall sick in a cold cell's corner; I had to lecture on the Treaty of Versailles, or on some other sublime-sized silliness of so-called human society; I had to
            listen to student excuses; I had to mark exams as if I cared whether the dumb klutzes lived or died; 1 had to listen to my colleagues brag about their publications, run down rivals, gossip like hags; I had to keep calm when Martha never came home, when she went away for days to buy—what would it be now?— divans; l had to pretend to read the daily papers, to be concerned about Vietnam and other screws-of-the-world; 1 had to pack peanut butter lunches for the kids; 1 had to hug Herschel because—did he say?—he was going blind, and never ask him about his funnel vision; 1 had to do the shopping certainly— Martha had forgotten what a vegetable looked like before it was cooked; 1 had to keep the household accounts without having a household and knowing nothing of what she spent or earned or frittered or socked away in some substitute for her cunt, like candy for a rainy day.
              I could say to no one: this is my hole. This is my highest heaven of invention. Don’t you admire it? Isn’t it grand? See how the ladders have been wedged, the sides of the rte. smoothed as if paper had been used, or a sander; look at the clever way the hole's been hid, snuck inside a furnace like a kid gone to pull his pecker; watch in wonder while 1 disappear down the so small maw of my machination and then in a minute come out again, hey hey, it’s target practice time, the prairie dog is in view; or, if you’ve a moment and the inclination, slip down ladder number one where there’s still enough light to inspect the shoring, for which I’ve used bed boards in the classic manner, even stealing the initial ones from my own bed, how’s that for a twist on the old routine? yet w'ho will answer (assuming, assuming) yes, sure, happy to, to these inanities? and can 1 ask an old friend (assuming, assuming), can 1 ask him up to my study to watch me write: abed, or as the bullies used to make me pencil “my penis" on paper, “needs sucking,” they’d say, now write “I eat cunt," do it! c u n— come on—write t down; do it! to watch me write, read and weep, scoop up the sweepings of my soul—that may be too grandly put—so what? since all my words are soon sent from every sight between these other leaves, this history of another Reich, of other nose-bloody days.
              It has discouraged me: the secrecy, the loneliness of my occupations, the losing battle, so it seems, I’m waging, and, like every battle, pointlessly; I am sorrowful because I cannot share even a line of my real life with anyone, show anyone my mind—even my fat and fallen body would make a more acceptable display—so this cave-in has come at a bad time, when I’m already down and dirty, as deep in dung as any honeypot handler, with a heart which has no heart for tunneling another trowelful (as Culp says, my heart is beat); no heart for hiding one more thought, forming a phrase, following a lead; none for fleeing one more disappointing day the way dawn eludes both night and morning by subsiding into darkness or fading forward from the shade.
         If I'm to go on anyway, 1 guess I’ll have to crawl back down to the tunnel face and scoop out the roof-fall—careful as a cockroach—and shore the shaft, somehow, against this unforeseen softness, which seems to be located just above the line of my dig; it’s certainly not in front, which is as hard as Martha's feelings for me—no, not harder—for I do curl by curl carve my way through the closeness of this clay, I do chip by chip chunk it out, and that's what 1 have to repeat to myself, tell myself, that I succeed, chip by curl and chunk by trowel, to hack along. Have to, hey? well, won’t do it, no go, no way.
         If I'm to stay the course—continue—if I’m to keep my nose to the hole’s head, mole on and over, then I’m going to have to drop a little light down—a little light on a little wire—covered by a wire basket—because 1 can’t stand smelling my own sweat, hearing nothing but my own breath, without an eye to alleviate the monotones; I can’t bear the blindness of the job, mucking on without knowing what or where, or catching sight of the clay curls I’ve taken out only after I’ve taken myself there; they could be maggots from an ancient grave, good grief, who knows, down there in that absolute and nearly breathless darkness, I could come upon the corpse of someone I’ve murdered in my dreams, suddenly touch . . .
         That's what we really don’t know. We sail the seas and fly the skies and drive up and down all the roads, but the deepest caves, the cleverest caverns, cannot take us to the underground, tell us what goes on in that inner realm, however it happens, whether it’s as we think, ever so slowly, and life sleeps upside down there like bats, or whether, at the genetic center of the self, in pure birth earth, there is no need for any action and all is over and nothing’s begun: because we’re in that fabled place where compacts of conclusion coalesce like veins of coal, compressed past the thought of further futures and consequently beyond each form of the past, to be free of time like the proverbial bird, fixed— frozen sufficiently for it, fired, glazed—that’s what we really don’t know and maybe motivates my burrowing—if there’s a bottom nature, and just what’s what where the well ends, when we pass beneath its water, when we actually enter in’ and find ourselves in front of n and on the other side of i.
         Another irony. I used to annoy Martha by making up frightening stories to tell the boys: this was back before the boys had become so obnoxious, before their skinny acne’d smartass basso days; when they were runts not yet rebellious. 1 related tales full of concealed panels and secret passages, of peepholes in paintings, so placed there might be eyes where the eyes were; I told them about drape pulls which caused walls to pivot, latches in desk drawers which revealed hidden strongboxes and opened disguised safes, levers which activated trapdoors to drop bodies into underground rivers, of back stairs, escape routes, ornamental armor one could hide in; I described walls wide enough to
           slide inside of, beds which folded like chairs to murphy their occupants, or tables which turned, or chimney bricks which pulled out; I also spoke of legs which were hollow and lamps which listened, of tubes through which coral snakes slithered, or spiders were rappelled, the better to bite naked necks or sleeping thighs; and I told them about boxes with false bottoms, and explained in detail the malevolent significance of apparently innocent designs: treasure maps woven into rugs, secret signals conveyed by candles, codes of confederation contained in stained glass, otherwise indifferent objects which nevertheless rhymed; and 1 went on with relish about all sorts of grim things: dungeons, rats, bats, insects of diabolical deviousness, earwigs and tapeworms and mites which ate through eyes, centipedes and scorpions, all of whom lived in basements deep and dark and damp beyond belief, where vapors were produced which threw noses into comas if inhaled, and where ghosts, weighed down as if drowned by the self-indulgence of their prior lives, still plied their trade, scaring the talkative into silence, and terrifying the taciturn into gabbling. I did such a good job with my ghouls and goblins, my creatures, so called, of the dark, that for a long time the boys refused to hang their clothes in closets, and will rarely go into the basement still—a condition of character 1 could not have imagined would be of eventual value, and one which, had I wished to, l could never have induced.
             I complain of the tedium of my task; I grouse about my lack of loving companionship and the absence of any appreciative understanding, true; yet 1 know how hallowed the hidden is, how necessary it is for us to occupy a world of our own contriving, even though it has to find its moment of secrecy and silence in the midst of rabble’s rousing. 1 am also only too well aware of what happens when you try to share such unsharable things. Martha, for one, would tear my hair if she heard even a whispered word of my project; she’d call me crazy, rant about racism again, return old scars to active duty as painful wounds—it’s all so old, so trite, so automatic—nevertheless she would find my tunnel insufficiently tunnelesque in a dozen ways; she would wish, if it had to be dug, it had been done under her supervision; she would probably insist on one drop instead of two, on a more commodious entry, on better light and ventilation; she would be opposed on principle to off-the-cuff planning and makeshift shafts, although making do, cobbling, shimming, fudging, somehow getting on, is nearly the whole idea.
             Certainly, my own imaginary world has been under construction for a lifetime, and even as a kid 1 loved being hidden—hiding, eluding, evaporating, disappearing—not the way Herschel manages, simply by making no demands on anyone’s attention—but by keeping an active, even aggressive, public front, the board behind which Billy, Bill, Willi, William sat on his cycle like a cop and waited for
      speeders unwittingly to pass; whereupon, in my mind, Bill, Willi, William would pursue them, arrest them, screw the girls and shoot the guys, think their thoughts, swallow their saliva, untie a shoe or unstrap a watch, carry a grudge, condone their crimes, forcefeed them The Bostonians, enjoy how Willi, William made them wnthe, pop back behind my board and be all smiles outside, once again chummy to my chums, all to all, this space available, as advertised
         I would spend whole weeks as another person, in another place and time, spinning a heroic tale which would ingeniously include all I normally saw and thought and did, but reinterpreted in dream terms, revising Martha, my work, this house, class time, my moments of self-abuse, as situations, scenes, and players, because 1 lived in a double context: I was a secret agent, the prisoner of Zenda, a dime novel’s heroic hero; but later a Senate informant, a journalist with a nose for news, an absconder, con man, magician, Nazi mole; 1 was a Don Juan with a cock so active there wasn't a day it didn’t crow; 1 moved in the highest circles, was consulted concerning national policy, handled delicate negotiations, contrived stings, planned crimes, by god wheeled and dealed, did things, took over businesses, developed properties, cornered markets, cashed in stocks, bonds, markers, chips. Walter Mitty, master of men. Now, though, 1 do what I formerly dreamed: slipping inside the world in such a way 1 remain outside everybody, creating a kingdom like a realm of play, but now a realm in the Real, for I have made a cave which can cave in, a hole which can hide me better than my purchased plot, my advertised grave in Memory Green, a place where 1 can say absolutely anything I have testicles and lung and tongue for. There I can tell myself the truth, too, as Magus Tabor taught me, because ordinary life is supported by lies, made endurable through self-deception, because in my illusion no illusions are allowed.
         The cat. An uncomfortable case in point. The first fright. I had just encountered the drains, pipes of several kinds, and I realized I had to drop the level of my shaft another five or so feet to be sure to clear these and other utilities I might meet. It was early on, I was not so expert then as 1 am now; that is, I am presently more adept at overcoming the awkwardness of my ideas, the paucity of my means, the clumsiness of my execution, the occasional carelessness of my follow-up, although the awkwardness itself remains and I still progress, when I manage to, more in fits than starts.
         It was late. It was dark. I didn’t feel as bold about my work then as I do now, and I felt I had to proceed with nothing but a flash in one hand and a sharp trowel in the other, nervous as a burglar. The basement was a pit of pitch in the midst of which the furnace sat unseen, while inside it, darker yet if that were possible, my hole began, sinking like the look of someone blind to the turn below where the ladder sat—a bubble in the burrow to function as a wheel-
           around—before the tunnel’s horizontal shaft hollowed out a black that was blacker even than the surrounding compact of lightless dirt through which it had started its movement toward the cellar’s outer wall. That’s where 1 lay with my light, trying to crawl toward the tunnel’s nose, one arm, with the trowel, flung ahead of my head because the space in front became the size of a shoulder for the length of an arm, and I’d move that arm, its hand, hand’s tool, back and forth like a piston or a penis, punching the trowel point into the soil, rubble, hardpan—whatever was in front—and prying, scraping, picking, raking the earth back toward me where I’d sack it later, the light pointing rearward to the ladder’s bottom rung, a sight I preferred to see because somehow it was a comfort. I suppose it signified the way out. I have put a permanent crick in my neck, I fear, and to my general phiz I’ve given a nasty slit-eyed look, since at my dirt work I want only light to pass the lid, a not unreasonable concern inasmuch as the roof of the tunnel is terribly close above me and particles fall constantly, endangering anything open, as I confirmed to my discomfort when the ceiling subsided last night.
              So much for the situation. I push my arm into the dig’s narrowing neck: touch fur, hear hiss, draw back in total terror, first reflexively, cracking my elbow against the excavation’s closing sides, and then convulsively, thinking "rat” as I retreat: which takes the form of a swift wriggle hard for a man so fat, a wriggle which leaves me weak, a weakness I thank god didn't feel until I was topside nearly sick. “Rat,” I thought between heavy pants. Then past me, through the flashlit light, fur fled, frightening me again, so the flash fell to the basement floor and my flesh crawled after it. Cat, I said, quite out loud. Cat. Her cunt-cozy cat. I followed the light as it led me upstairs, cursing with a constancy which measured my humiliation.
              That, as they say, should have been that. Except the sneaky beast was using my fleeway like a pan, shitting and pissing at the tunnel’s face, another unpleasantness I literally discovered when cat turds turned up in the clay curls and my hand came back damp and ammoniated from its work. 1 thought our encounter might have frightened the creature for good, but it apparently thought the hole was perfect for its fecal needs and kept returning. The situation became totally intolerable the night the cat clawed me coming out, bolting, as it was able to do, along the shaft, and running over me as though I were some fallen tree: neck, shoulder, left leg, catching it in series, my shoulder really suffering—it’s still sore—and my exasperation reaching beyond the range of mere degree.
              C. A. T. Martha’s cat was orange and black, short, fat, hairy, called tabby something, the vain possessor of a full tail, it was also fannied like a fist of feathers, fair hairs sprouting from its ears, with a permanently sly smile, a lit-
       tie flat peke-style nose, altogether a messy genetic mix, and a rotten lot of trouble, clawing carpet and curtains, shedding hair in moltlets, coughing up balls of the stuff in pukes of food, leaving dirty shadows of its sleep on beds and on the couch, but most annoying of all, crawling down between Martha’s legs to snooze next to her snatch, so she’d have to pet herself to pet it, hidden hair-smell everywhere, pussy to pussy, like putting a hat on your purse, the cat’s deep purr vibrating her, making Martha smile in her scissor-shaped sleep.
          Where once upon a time, against those so soft inner lips, I’d smiled a smile to see how it felt, and Marty said it did, it felt ... it felt .. . swell.
          I would call up the tunnel to kitty kitty the cunt-snuggler. I wanted to determine if it was lurking there; to try to lure it out if it was; but it could never be inveigled, would refuse to make a sound, and wait to run by me, having shat in my palm, claws at crescent, always a shock speeding by me, a needle-bearing bolt of fur. Then there was this one time finally, when l found 1 had it_I
       was entirely surprised—I had it by the neck, I had both hands on its neck— how I managed 1 cannot imagine—but 1 had both hands on its neck, the cat kicking like crazy, and I’m trying to hold it out in front of me, away from me, farther up in the hole where I had grabbed it; I had it, both hands had it; and I squeezed with a hate of long duration, so hatefully hard, and angrily immediate, I never heard a neck snap or much of a moan in its mew, instead the back legs jerked, perhaps twice, against my extended well-sleeved arms and that was that. I had on my hands a dead cat.
          Not so good. No. Took it out of there, though, for the last time. That was okay. That was good. And I’d never have to clean its turds from in front of me again, though I'd have its piss smell as a memory, because even now when I crawl past that point, crawling to the front of the shaft, I get a whiff of where it was when it took its last shit and relieved itself in the soul and center of my secret. So it was a good thing it was gone. I couldn’t complain. Nor would I have to imagine it curled against my wife’s cunt again where 1 should have been, intoxicated by a tickle, in the warm dark center of her secret. Nor would I miss the puling and the petting and the carrying-on, the babytalk, the special food, the fawning and the combing, the rubby-dubby-dubbing, nor the circus of filthy pulex either, which it would carry around like a lorryful of Hessians, ready to leap out and rape and pillage or at least fleabite every flea-able surface, getting at me in the most obnoxious venues, no, actually, I would miss nothing of it, not a floating hair’s worth, not an insolent stare, nor one more insolent tail flick, nor one more insincere purr, insincere leg rub, indifferent snub, arrogant walk.
          Of course 1 would keep my mouth shut. The kids would wonder. Martha would feel in her sleep for its fur and not find it. There would be predictable
           tears. I’d trouble myself to look nonplussed and glum. But I would remember, no shit at my site, not again; no cat pee soiling my tunnel dirt, no scratch marks, no fur fly, no mourning when nothing’s been lost.
             I had a dead cat on my hands just the same. I plopped it in a paper sack, and thought about what to do. I wanted to get rid of it warm. I didn’t fancy sitting with a stiff cat as a corpse. Where’s your purr now, my fine feline? I even composed a soliloquy of scorn and triumph, but mostly I kept quiet. The solution, you might say, rose up and smote me. That, not the cat’s killing, was my victory.
             Sort of sacked, it now lies beneath several layers of carefully selected soil in the bottom right-hand drawer of a large and hideous Wild West wardrobe, the one the delivery boys heaved as high as the second-floor landing before their willingness gave out. I wondered would there be a smell. But there's no air in there. Packed with dirt, I wedged the drawer as tight as fast friends. So maybe it won’t spoil. Or if it spoils, it won’t smell. Or if it smells, the smell won’t seep out. Or if it gets out, we won’t smell it. Sometimes things go good. Every day 1 look with Culp’s eye at that chest and I say: catacomb. Every day I try to dig a little farther. Every day I draw something down in the dirt.
             Learning to Drive
             My father was happiest behind the wheel. And he always managed to own a vehicle of substance and standing. For many years he drove a Packard which he had bought secondhand from one of those proverbial "little old ladies” who had never unwrapped the spare or let the car roll down her drive. The traditional salesman’s lie may have been true this time, for that is how the car behaved. Indeed, it was a beaut, and sported (this was the detail I loved most) a shiny metal figure, winged at head and heels, leaning out ahead of the car’s hood: Mercury in a helluva hurry. The running board was high, the headlights huge, rounder than eyes. Its paint was as deep and black as outer space, its chrome shone even at night as if it had absorbed and saved light during the day. The grille was grand and cleaved the air like a set of silver knives. To this day I cannot understand why people want to sit as close to the road as roadkill, because I remember how wonderful it was—short as I was, too, I suppose—to be perched where I could see the world around me whiz by through the car’s wide windows.
             And because my father loved to drive we took trips. The shortest might be two or three days, the longest the customary vacationer’s two weeks. Maybe
       they were his rivers, but it’s more likely they were an opportunity to get away from an increasingly disagreeable routine, and a chance to exercise a skill which gave him pleasure.
         We were motoring through New England. [ was probably twelve or thirteen. My aunt was not along with us on this trip. We were all relieved. My father kept track of our daily distances and miles per gallon. If either was good he was greatly gratified. He liked knowing that he'd been down this or that road, and, for many years afterward, would remember the route numbers, the names of the towns we passed through, the tourist homes or motor courts where we stopped (we avoided hotels as too expensive), our adventures on the highway (car trouble, detours, cops), pleasant points of interest, strangest sights, most memorable moments. He liked going where he hadn’t been, as if, with the car, he was crayoning the country and would be pleased when it was all one color. He shared with my mother his memories of these journeys, they spoke about them often, and even the bad times were recalled with affection. I was not expected to participate in the composition of this part of our family history.
         Although right now I am the one whose hands are on the wheel—the one, this time, in charge of the car.
         On this particular trip, we had driven up to the top of Mount Washington, the third-highest peak in the East, so many and so many feet above sea level, a long hard haul for any engine, and our car had been valiant, had warmed without overheating, had never coughed or panted, had taken hairpin turns with aplomb. My father was proud. He bought a banner which said, in effect, this car was driven to the top of Mount Washington, so many and so many feet. 1 think the sticker was long, green, with white letters, and clung to the car’s bumper as determinedly as its chrome. Well, ole Alice made it, he would say with nostalgic affection. Though the brakes got a little mushy going down and needed a little pumping. And the rocky washed-out roadbed softened the springs. Still, ole Alice managed.
         All our cars were given, by my father, female first names, and they were “ole” even when brand new. There was Sadie and Gertie and Alice and Doris. Doris didn’t do well. My father seriously considered rechristening her, and did call Doris Doris, rather than "ole,’’ oftener than not. Damn you, Doris, was the usual form of address. 1 accepted all this without a thought. Ships are similarly sexed by sailors, 1 gather. Yet the allegedly phallic character of the car, as 1 came to understand it, didn’t comport well with Gertie and Doris and Alice.
         The automobile certainly enlarged my father's powers, and his attitude toward his machines was like that of a pet owner: affection found nowhere else in his nature flowed forth toward the dials and levers, wheels and lamps and buttoned leather seat covers, of his cars. They were washed and shined and
          dusted and polished, tuned up and repaired and broken in, but above all they were discussed. New improvements. Model years. Costs. Performance. Lubricants and fuels. Designs. Now I believe I understand why we took the trips we did. Our journeys were for the sake of the Chevrolets and the black Packard. For Sadie and Gertie and Alice. Even for Doris who got her fender dented on her first outing, and broke her fan belt another time, and was given to flats and to fuming and to tappets which sounded like nervous spoons. The rest of us were really along just for the ride.
             When my father’s friends got together they spoke of sports, politics, and automobiles. And each of these fields of study and discourse was filled with figures having to do with expense and achievement, with expectations expressed as promises, and with any number of conflicts and tests. More and more, in my mind, brands, teams, and parties resembled one another. There were always new elections, old candidates to be enjoyed, new candidates to be assessed; there were always new model years, new claims to be examined, new performance figures to be argued, merits to be weighed, prices to be compared; there were always more matches, more predictions, more explanations, more excuses. And everyone was partisan: loyally for, strongly against. And everybody bet. Even if the bets were only betchas. They were made. Remembered. Added up. Successes were loudly enjoyed. Failures were publicly scorned.
             For my father, the garage, not the saloon, not the pool hall, was the center of the male domain. I saw calendars with girls on them, yet, except for these images, there was no mention or reminder of the "fairer" sex. Tools were deities here. The oily rag was a religious relic. The hoist, the pit, were as theological as altar and nave. And garages were cool and dark, noisy as machine shops sometimes, always as odoriferous as a bakery, casual yet purposeful, messy yet ordered. They were realms of respect (in those days, they were not considered regions of ripoff and rudeness, as they are thought to be now), because the mechanic combined the surgical and diagnostic skills of the medical profession with the encouragements and canny know-how of a coach: he repaired, but he advised.
             I didn’t enjoy my visits to the garage because I knew it meant I'd sit around a lot in a little ratty office on a little ratty chair to cool my heels while my father chatted, with nothing to read or look at but parts catalogues. There’d be a dirty wad-filled toilet, and on the outside of the sick green toilet door always shone that calendar girl whose big bazooms I’d preferred to have stared at without being seen. For me, the environment was foreign, seedy, disagreeably adult. Cigarettes and sodas were available, and candy bars which were never sold but lay snoozing in their boxes like the garage dog. A familiar jokey tone prevailed. Benign teasing was permitted. Still, it was sagacity which held sway
      in this confidently masculine environment where manual skill was united with practical intelligence, and problems of every kind were understood in terms of nuts, bolts, oil, the failure of rings to fit, and the failure of cogs to mesh: daily, the grounds for our most immediate social discontents were laid bare; hourly, reasons for the recent collapse of the team were reviewed; momentarily, the causes of concern for certain valves and cylinders were vigorously investigated. Symptoms proliferated like roadside signs, and here at least they were shrewdly read: a hitch in the left-hander’s delivery, layoffs by the motorcar companies, a little zingy sound when the engine was revved, they signified, they explained, they foretold; and as the machine was repaired, so were the wide worlds ills, if not remedied, at least diagnosed, and the team’s present plight understood.
         Now, of course, I realize the importance of such relationships—the easy camaraderie of the skilled with their clients, for instance, in a richly significant locale: the garage, the barbershop, the bank—which foster that good will among citizens so essential to the welfare of the State; but then it was just a bore, more adult self-indulgence, more odd profitless behavior one had to endure.
         So my father knew what spark plugs were for, where all those wires went, and why, when, and how to add and measure oil, what to listen for—this rattle, that knock, this ping—how to check the hoses, why the battery needed its regular ration of distilled water, what to do when the engine overheated (a common complaint), how to replace wipers and execute a dozen other small automotive chores which I resolutely remained as ignorant of as my mother or my aunt. 1 loved to watch gasoline bubble through the pump's glass, and hear the hiss of compressed air, but that was about it; nor did 1 notice what the driver did to shift gears, or what pedal the foot hit to speed up or stop, or what most of the dials meant (1 understood the speedometer, one gauge was enough); I could open and close windows and doors; 1 could sing in the backseat; I could snooze; but the rearview mirror made me dizzy, the glove compartment would never open at my touch, and 1 burned an important finger on the cigarette lighter. I have never learned a license plate—not to this day.
         It was my father's world—the bank, the barbershop, the gas station, the playing field—and he could have it. You might squeeze pimples with those big clippers instead of chew hair—what did 1 know?—since, for all such things, I had no care. 1 had a little account which my father oversaw, though there was nothing to see because I never drew anything in or out. The bat he put in my hand, 1 broke bottles with. Glass flew down the foul line. In the late afternoon.
      1 remember, light would streak across the floor of the garage through open doors and dirty windows to fall like water into the grease pit whose floor it seemed was a mountainside below. And the clippers would buzz in my ears too
           loudly for bees, the cloth was always pinned too tightly around my neck, and the teller would count Ten, Mr. Kohler, twenty, Mr. Kohler, twenty-three, and twenty-five, then grin, then say, Don’t spend it all at once, then with a thin finger touch the tip of his green visor in a convivial salute. Except for a game or two a year, which we’d travel a tiresome distance to see, sports were reports in the papers, broadcasts, and talk, soft-toned, temperate, leaning on a fender over which a long cloth had been thrown for safety, toothpick in the mouth to improve the meditative quality of the mind, wrench in the hand to lend ideas heft, and the soft rustle of turning pages where the patrons waited, in a chair, on a bench, for your hair to be shaken to the floor, and for the word “next.”
              A distant cousin, who cares? she had a cunt I was curious about, as I was curious about every cunt, about the idea of such a pocket, their alleged existence; this cousin, come to visit, was inveigled by me into the garaged Packard’s backseat where I would show her something amazing, at least surprising, at least something, she’d be delighted, I'd let her pet it, and then she’d show me, et cetera, the space where penises came from like carrots pulled out of the ground, I had some such idea—the good earth—nothing resembling castration, so she pulled up her dress in the gray light of the shut-up space where the Packard was parked and before I could tug her panties down her mother called from the kitchen window, my cousin giggled, said, Another time, as if she were twenty-three, and dashed out the garage door to her mother’s side as if she were five, the scaredy cat, so I sat in the front seat instead—why was the car unlocked?—and pretended to steer, making small motor-sounding sounds, speeding up dale and then down, fixing in my imagination the universal connection between the automobile, an insecure privacy, sexual fumbling, substitute fantasies, and bitter disappointment.
              The trip I remember most was our drive down Franconia Notch. Beautiful country. 1 love New England’s tame mountains. It gave me a thrill to read signs insisting 1 was standing three feet above the ground. A thirty-degree grade was dizzying. It made me happy to pass posts saying we were entering this or that national forest. Holy precinct. Or to be warned about fires, or see towers where park rangers spied on the leaves. Every stretch of moving water was a pleasure, the gentlest creek provoked glee, and any place called Glen was indescribably desirable. As towns were admirable if they possessed a white wooden steeple set in a green square.
              Often, on these trips, my mother’s fingers would, in effect, burst. They would suddenly swell, especially the middle ones. She would lather them with creams and wrap them in gauze, but 1 never saw the good. Then they would pimple all over like pink pickles. We would lose lots of valuable time hunting down a doctor who might treat her. This was never easy and made my father
      angry. My mother did countless cruel things to herself just to displease him. We drove around several of the clapboard-covered squares looking for a physician’s sign. Generally, when we did track one down, the doctor said ringworm or eczema or allergy and slathered her fingers with goo and wrapped them in gauze, to no good I ever saw. One MD said dermatitis, what was the difference? the fingers swelled just the same and then pimpled and then popped, the good in that being the itch, which went away when they oozed; and I’d buy more tape and gauze and wring my own hands to no effect. The third doc we dug up on that trip said, standing in his office doorway when we left, my mother wrapped like a mummy up half both arms, Something close to you hates your hands, something you put on your face, something you pet, eh? something like clothes, something like that, you better find out what, eh? otherwise you have cancer of the liver.
         I envision my mother stretched out on a grease rack, the mechanic eyeing her from below. Rust. Simple case of rust, he says, beginning to scrape her rotting flesh down to the bone. Repaint. Rechrome. Good as new. Better. I’ll put on more coats than it had when it came from the factory. Bake each layer as if it were cake. Wax the result like skis. Give it a super shine just like it says on the can.
         It’s money your mother’s hands are allergic to, the dad in me says. She shouldn’t touch money, especially bills, big bills. Don't bring her to the bank, not anywhere the ink of finance stains the air.
         I had a cousin once, it got in his scalp, the wormy stuff, as if it were coming up from his brain, nobody could do nuthin, hey, his hair was coming out in gouts, in whole hanks, hey, horrible, so I shaved him smooth as a pool ball, not so easy, that wormy stuff everywhere, but I shaved him smooth just the same, and then I used this skin sander stuff, sanded his scalp clean, and then I scrubbed the sucker with green soap, that stuff with the hospital smell, and we put him under the dry lamp like he was a boulder in the desert and baked the shit out, did the trick, you gotta be severe, he steamed like a pot, but in a few months his skin grew back, and his hair, too, eventually. You just gotta get to the roots. That gets results, the barker said.
         I began to hate those green-treed squares, the straight white fences, the little polished brass plaques which said Who Me, M . D. And my father would be furious about the bills, and then about the cost of the medicines, and then about the time lost, and then about the nuisance of what he called her nerves. My mother tended to bear her suffering in silence, even when she shook, but her eyes would be abrim with tears, her nose red from wiping, her shoulders slumped into all sorts of soiled housecoatish attitudes, her bandaged hands half held out in front of her like an embarrassed beggar, so that you wished she
            would say something instead of mime her misery. How annoying it was, when my father and I would find—and finally get her through—a doctor’s door, to have her minimize her pain, her itch, the visibly sorry condition of her hands, and to answer most of his questions wrongly or falsely or vaguely or not at all, and then maintain, afterward, a disdain for this man and his advice and his profession (an attitude which my father and I also shared, but one we did not find agreeably confirmed by her childish criticisms and mean-spirited prejudice).
               Can’t hit, someone would say, the slow curve. Curve him and unnerve him, my father used to yell at the pitcher, although he was seated miles away—a fact which caused me at first to wonder why all the outcry of advice, as if it were so important, so impelling, when the man couldn’t hear it, probably had been offered it before, doubtless didn't care, or couldn’t throw a curve or he would have, or maybe really knew better, knew this guy hit curves like a drunken driver—though it turned out my father simply wanted the batter pitched inside: don't throw at the bat, you fool, throw at his head instead, he’d shout, but not, I’d finally understand, so that the players would obey, but so the other people in the stands would appreciate his vigor, his know-how, his active concern; it was, like the Shakespearean soliloquy, meant merely for the world. Can’t hit the slow curve. He don’t run out dropped thirds. Bats good in the cage. Has an arm like a gun. Won’t bunt a mate a base. Got no glove. Can’t count past one. Sneaky as a kike in cream cheese. My father drove like that, on the fuel from a line of baseball-style chatter: left turn—geez!—is that what you call a left turn? hey, thanks for the signal, pal, go back to sleep, Mister Nertz, you in the Olds, stay in your lane, lady, be a hog at home, smartass, you must have your plot paid for to pass on a hill like that, 1 ought to run your cheap tin off the road before you wound somebody, on and on, the whole way through traffic, in every town, though on the open highway he’d quiet some, when the road grew empty, and the hills lay out on either side like a painted scene, barn here (red), a cow there (brown), fence around (white), meadow below that (green), and the small blue stream of complaint he spoke, like his bellows from the bleachers, all for us, safely behind closed windows; for he was a tough guy in his automobile, equal to any other, lord of his run of the road, and watchful, skillful, deft, as others were not, careful yet bold, aggressive though safe, and quick as a wink, as no one else was, broadcasting his opinions as if he owned the station, and managing his machine with a smoothness which substantiated every claim and made him king.
               1 sail on a stream of curses, too; I picked that up from dad, though, unlike him, I am an impatient driver, and dislike being held up by anything, however legitimate or beyond anyone’s control. My father’s vituperation, as meant as mine, as mean, was verbally more mild, for there were women and children
      present, whereas I encounter assholes everywhere, and motherfuckers, certainly, and pushy bastards, and cunts of all kinds, crowding the highway, obstructing my path, or failing to signal (an omission which my father also hated), or simply not charging a light and leaving me to sit and fume in front of a too recent red.
         Everyone with a fat neck—all he could see—was a wop, anyone with knotty hair was a kike, blacks were niggers, naturally, spicks were swarthy and skinny, women were unspeakably women, an observation invariably preceded by “whaddya expect, it’s a . . or “Don’t that beat all—go home, girl, and cook dinner.’’ The difference between us, on this point, I guess, is that my father hurled racial slurs, while I employ obscenities. Pass me, you prick, and you die, is, 1 think, more impersonal than my father’s: don’t honk at me, you bohunk, you h'aven’t earned the right; but maybe it’s simply six of one. The worst is when a woman, observing me in her rearview mirror, my mouth going as though I was at dinner, gives me the duckchatter gesture. Then I want to dismember.
         My father didn't speed up when angry, as I do, or challenge some knothead whose mother was clearly a cannibal by pulling alongside and giving him a glare or a stare or a finger or a fist fuck, or by cutting in front of the dame who was born with her cunt misplaced in her nose, or slowing to a stall ahead of the honky who dared to toot his horn at the last light to suggest you get your ass in gear; no, my father’s fury did not make him do foolish things, it only increased his word power; but, my goodness, how completely he spoke his mind behind the wheel, one reason he loved driving so, 1 suspect, although he spoke his mind at the radio, too, at the magazine, about events in the daily news; nevertheless there was in that freedom no release, no encounter with another person, no power under one’s feet, no words, as it were, abetted by the grip and guidance of the hand.
         My father’s animosities, unlike mine, were confined to the human sphere; he did not yell at detour signs, curse a run of red lights, condemn the streets on which he was lost, sneer at speed limits. On the other hand, although it was a mistake to have given women the vote, it was a catastrophe they were allowed to drive, nor should any young whippersnapper be let on the road, nor any of the inferior races, unable to see or read or think; but there it was, all you had to do to understand what was wrong with our society was to venture out onto the highway, drive down a single street, and there they’d be, those others, mucking up everything, disobedient, incompetent, irreverent, irresponsible. Behind the wheel, one sees in others only evil.
         My father gave no sign he understood the impact of the automobile on what, even then, we were calling "modern life." The very pleasures of power and in-
           dependence he prized in driving were available to everyone, including those he saw as his social inferiors, immigrants like his own family perhaps, but those who had come from the wrong countries, and had brought the wrong eyes, lips, noses, to the new world: Jews, Slavs, Southern Europeans. Nor did he count the cost to the countryside of the roads he loved to motor down: the land lost to gas stations, auto courts, and parking lots, as well as the acres buried beneath the highway itself, the poles, the signs, the shops which accompanied it and disfigured the landscape, the sewer lines and drainage ditches, the sums of money spent so that barbarians from all over—especially the South—could show up in your town (ah, but they bought gas, needed to be fed, wanted to locate a doctor). He did not care or calculate the pollution of the ear and eye and air, the unhappy social mobility which depopulated small towns, overcrowded cities, tore up families and pulled up roots as though every root was a weed’s; nor did he measure the immense amount of natural resource which went into the automobile’s manufacture and maintenance, and the resulting yards, fields, and mountains of junk which accumulated, the extent of the fossil fuels consumed, the miles of land which mining stripped and raped, the number of lungs blackened by factory smoke, the forests, of destroyed trees, an almost military encroachment upon the wild with the consequent loss of plant and animal life to the vulgarest forms of human habitation whose spread was encouraged, if not made possible, by the car; the clogging of streams and killing of fish, he never monitored, the immense damage to the birds, not omitting the fact that the automobile is the world’s most effective killing machine, with victims outnumbering any war, with millions maimed, shocked, crazed by the car, half the world trashed by its production, made brutal, ugly, used up, useless, with endless highways and hospitals to maintain, most citizens in debt to their eyes for this toy, only so my father and I and everyone like us could drive about in our insulated canisters and curse one another. Mr. Hitler's Holocaust can’t hold a candle. After all, his is kaput. This way to the gasoline, ladies and gentlemen.
              We think we’ve been given a gift, and it turns out to have been a catastrophe. But catastrophes, too, have their benign consequences. People nowadays talk about winning or losing the war in Vietnam as if either result could be confidently given a value, whereas the future in any case remains obscure. The Bomb, the Big Bad Wolf of my time, will probably bring neither extermination nor peace, but prolong the life and use of conventional arms. Drop napalm not a nuke. Anything nonnuclear seems almost benevolent. So the Holocaust (bad) makes Israel possible (good), and unsettles the Middle East (bad), but prolongs Arab confusion and impotence (good), while deepening their sense of grievance (bad), until ping no longer follows pong, and we grow too smart to make these simple moral judgments (pause for a moment of bitter hilarity), for Maniche-
      anism has much to be said for it: what hurts X helps Y, or so they think, but give them time, they’ll change their mind, meanwhile the historian should shield his eye from these distortions (noting them, though, for they are also details), refuse to take sides, remembering that innocence is often guilt, and guilt somebody else’s grievance, and grievance often an excuse, or, to other interests, a downright lie, while the lie, stripped of its intent, emerges as the new view, acclaimed as wise, until times take another tilt, and we begin to go around again, now more or less confused, until the fog lifts (some blowhard has brought to bear his big wind), the scene clears, and the truth is known (pause for another moment of scornful cackle), for Manicheanism is so much malarkey: what hurts X hurts X, and don’t forget it, dwell on it, take it to heart, make history out of it, encourage feuds, and it is unjust, it is intolerable, that what has hurt X has helped Y, for Y is an evildoer, that’s well known, din it in our children’s ears, until Y finds it convenient to be a friend and X to excuse him, sure, that was then, we're over that, let’s progress, get on, ahead, except that Y, the deep-down despicable little rat, will betray X once again, has betrayed him, is even now making wily plans, history repeats, we should never have shut our eyes to that fact, din it in our children's ears, make their hearts bleed for the past, put it on their backs like the crudest burden, although what they carry allows another a lighter life, and there is something to Manicheanism after all [period of ungovernable Olympian mirth]. My mother's fingers grew too swollen for their rings. She couldn’t even squeeze her fist through certain of her narrower bracelets. 1 was grateful for that because I disliked my mother’s bracelets. She wore as many as an African. And most were made of cheap silver, were thin rings of copper or wide ones of brass, so her wrists were always both noisy and green. 1 guess like parrots, although that comparison didn’t immediately occur to me. The gauze which wrapped her hands was cut and slit when it reached her arm and then tied in a tight bow, another sort of bangle, at the place on the wrist where a girl might wear a gardenia to a ball. She and her hands, we and our worries, were driving beside the scenic banks of the Merrimack River, out from the village of Concord toward Laconia and Lake Winnipesaukee, and it must have been near midmorning (I remember the summer light stinging the surface of the water as though the water were slapped), when my mother said, in a low clear-for-her quite frightened voice, My rings. She had left her rings, both wedding and engagement, on the edge of the washbasin, in the cabin where we’d slept the night before. She believed. She saw them there in her muddled mind’s eye. In any case, she didn’t have her rings. They weren't in her purse where she’d been keeping them. Shed just looked. She didn t know where they were. She thought she could see them lying together on the porcelain. That’s where she’d left them. Both rings. Fifty miles or more to the rear. If they were still there.
             Your wedding ring? the engagement ring I gave you? your rings, my father asked in a voice as swollen as her fingers. You left our marriage in a cheapjack cabin in a third-class motor court? Normally he would have berated her nonstop, but this time he was in a sorrowful sick rage, in a genuine fury, and his feelings were too enormous to emerge with any ease. My mother began to cry in earnest. It was not the self-pitying sniffles of the drunk she was even then becoming. There was nothing manipulative about them. These were sobs of despair; for if those rings were lost (1 knew it, too, overhearing, huddled in the backseat, almost numb with apprehension), her marriage was lost; my father’s voice and posture, his choked silence said it, her sobs said it, and I knew, too, overhearing, even if my arms were around my ears, even through their pounding, I could tell it from his driving, as we returned, swiftly but with exaggerated care, toward Concord, everyone silent finally but the blood beating in our heads, that the fragile dying relation my parents had could not sustain such a blow, such a symbolic statement, the simple truth: her fingers could not bear to wear his rings.
             The maid will find them, my mother eventually said. Maid, my father snorted. Maid in heaven. That place has no maids. Well, somebody cleans. She’ll find them, my mother insisted. Steal them, you mean. Gone into some spade’s pocket. Call. What? Couldn’t you call, call the court, I suggested, tell them to keep an eye out. So that blond bun-headed babe behind the desk can take them? Better they buy beer for the spooks. Those were my mother’s rings, my father then said with needless cruelty. They were—we’d heard it often—• heirlooms, handed down—you might say, literally—from parent to groom. The stones weren’t large, though the design had a certain style. In any case, they didn’t dazzle.
             My father knew nothing about Freud, about signs or portents, about losing, forgetting, or slips of the tongue. Yet, intuitively, each of us gave it—‘the loss— the same dreadful and decisive meaning. As it is in history, it wasn’t the event but its interpretation that mattered. And if we should return in time to recover the jewelry, find the rings precisely where they had been put, it would mean my mother had come to her senses in time, that this severance was not as fateful as it, at first, had seemed, since she might not have noticed her loss for several more hours, or even days. Only the road rolled on ahead, through a landscape in which there could have been anything—had there been dinosaurs dancing, they wouldn’t have been able to attract our attention.
             Even in my father, grief was overpowering anger. Later, when I considered my parents’ marriage, I wondered at first why they should mourn. Would I mourn Martha? Yes. 1 would. And won’t finding my dirt in her drawers divorce us? Yes. Most likely. So should 1 have done it, or just thought about doing it,
      bag after bag, I suppose, carried up from the basement and poured carefully into the slide-out privacies of her dressers? My parents were bound by their suffering. Without my father, my mother would have foundered instantly, instead of dying from a decade of drink, and my father, already in pain from the disease that would cripple him, what would he have? not even the dubious company of my aunt, who would be borne off in the wake of her sister, though he'd certainly say good riddance, still, rid is what he would be.
        Are you sure, I asked my mother in desperation, are you sure you didn't put them somewhere else? in one of the bags? mightn’t they be in the trunk? No, she said, beginning to weep once more. No, they are lying there on the sink, both together, 1 know. Can it hurt to look? No, I can see them. I remember. I felt my father slow the car, though. A mile or so, it slowed. My mother said, We better check. Another mile and we were down to twenty by the dial. Won’t take long, I said. Better, my mother said, blubbering. We stopped near a brook, well off the road. Where rainwater from the shadowing hills ran into the river. My father said nothing, just got out and opened the trunk. My mother tottered to his side. He pulled out the biggest bag first and undid the straps. It opened like jaws, and there, in a small built-in box which was fastened shut with a simple flat hook, in a cardboard tray like you find in steamer trunks, the first place we looked, the rings were, lying in a tangle of safety pins with a thimble for company and a single white powdery pill as well, whose indented cross told me it was aspirin.
        Jesus Christ, my father said. Jesus Christ, Peg, what did you nearly do to us?
        How can you feel relieved and ruined at the same time? I heard the tumble of the stream as, nearby, it passed over rocks. Now that my heart wasn’t ringing in my ears, the water was loud. I said my own Jesus, under my breath. Jesus, just rings, just rings, 1 said.
        Of that trip, my father apparently remembered the drive up Mount Washington. My mother recalled most clearly the doctor telling her she might have cancer of the liver. I remember the sound of that stream. In a car you can see what goes by, but you can’t hear the smile of the world.
        Squam Lake was large enough to have an island in it. We checked into a tourist home nearby, in the cheap seats, then drove to the water’s edge to watch the sun set. The road we took went straight into the lake, breaking up as it entered the water. Once they may have used it to launch boats. Wherever the public park was, we missed it. For the remainder of the day, my parents hadn't said a word more than necessary. It was a silence of exhaustion, not of hurt or anger, I now suspect. When we stumbled down to test the temperature, my mother turned an ankle, and my heart, already resting on whatever of me was bottom, sank into silt, was twice submerged. However, my father took hold of
            her, held her up, steered her down, and she managed to put an unwrapped hand in the cool lake like she was being blessed by the Ganges. Then, with my father’s arm around her back, they watched the sun sink behind the far shore’s trees while I nervously observed them. It was one of those moments, false to the core, in which you think that “everything" is going to be all right. I resolved never to learn to drive a car. My breathing was shallow, and the lap of the lake was light.
              When my father decided 1 was old enough, when my father determined it was time for me to become a man, he announced—it was Sunday morning, 1 was facedown on the floor, reading the funnies—he told me he was going to teach me how to drive. No need, 1 said. Not interested. I knew my father had no enthusiasm for this project. Others might sit in his car, enjoy his car, admire his car, but no one else might drive that car. Yet my reluctance was met with indignation. Nothing I care for ever interests you, he complained. It was true. You reject everything I believe in; you dampen my enthusiasms more than your mother; you root for opposing teams only to annoy me, 1 know it; you approve whatever I dislike, detest anything I esteem. He had it right. 1 get around quite well on my bike, I said. It’s not natural, all your buddies drive. You want to wear short pants all your life? I remember I had to yell at you before you’d learn to dribble. That was it, of course. My father felt obliged to make a man of me. What else were fathers for? And that meant teaching me to drive a car, just as, in the past, a baseball glove had been forced over my fingers, a basketball had been bounced off my nose, and I’d had to spend hours trying to throw a spiral. That’s not it yet, my father would shout, retrieving the football from the street.
              I fell my first time on roller skates and fortunately sprained my wrist. Although my tricycle had been like bones to me, and I believed in my BB gun more than I ever did in God, 1 was sixteen before I found an old bike parked in an alley and wobbled off on it, imagining a hot pursuit which never came. In minutes I rode as I fancied a master might. Hell, I could shoot; I could ride; what else did I need to do to prove 1 could pee standing up? catch the clap from a whore? Apparently, I needed to be able to drive.
              Driving was indeed what daddy did, dad did, father did, not me. I sang hit tunes in the backseat. I watched the road whiz by. I snoozed. I tried to read. I was sometimes interested in our speed. Otherwise the front seat was where they were, and where not even my eyes wished to waste time. They might look ahead, I looked to the side. They fetched the whiskey pint from the glove box where it had grown hot as Christmas punch. I sucked on balls of butterscotch. Up front they suffered and bickered and tried to decide on roads and when was lunch and where we ought to sleep the night, but the seatback was the Great Divide. I occupied my area like a little nation.
        My father was appalled to find that though 1 had spent many hours, actual days, in an automobile, I had noticed nothing about how they were started or stopped, driven or parked. In fact, my father refused to believe my ignorance was as great as it seemed; he was convinced I was shamming, being stupid to confound him, inept to shame him, shilly-shallying to annoy. That he should have to say "gearshift” at all, or show me its positions, to have to suffer these pretenses (for I was plainly pretending) that I (his son) didn't know what or where or why "first” was, or where the key fit, or what you wiggled to raise the hood, and once you had raised the hood, why you had, or what you then did this was bewildering, aggravating, and humiliating to him, all at once.
        My father could see I was completely confused. I was behind the wheel. My father sat in the seat beside me. That meant his seat pads had to be moved and readjusted. His discomfort sat beside me so heavily the pads sagged. My father believed 1 should learn the basics, and this meant 1 should learn the standard shift. However, because of his arthritis, my father had finally purchased an automatic—Dyna something—which he could manage only by pushing the shift buttons with a piece of round stick like a fat dowel held against the palm of his right hand. So the stick wouldn’t slip away, while driving in traffic possibly, it hung from his wrist by a wide rubber band. Consequently he was making me imagine a lever which came out of the floor and had a big black knob on the end of it he told me to pretend to move in airy patterns while 1 pushed an invisible pedal to the floor with my left foot. My father would make gear clash noises when he felt 1 was failing to follow his instructions, noises which startled me, coming from him, and noises which I failed utterly to understand.
        What is the matter with you? This was said so often—the outcry question_
      it might have been my name. Weren't you ever curious? How many times have you seen me start this car? back out this drive? signal for a turn? I might have pointed out that my mother, who had sat beside him many more years than I had lolled on my back and rump in the seat behind, knew perhaps less about his machine than 1 did, but that fact would not have received a very warm reception or relieved me of my blame. He would shake his head in evident disgust. What’s the matter with you? I might have pointed out that he had driven the Packard years ago; that a Chevrolet had been the car to follow the favorite; that he hadn’t been such a cripple then, during those halcyon Packard days, but now there were these buttons, and this Dyna thing, the past was past and I didn’t need to know it; that I had sat in the backseat, anyway, and had a poor view; that if driving had been his pleasure, being driven was my fate, and anyway 1 had no buddies; that he should hobble back indoors and hate Gabriel Heatter, or some other voice from the radio or the page, ask what was the matter with the world, and not me; that in any case what really was the matter with
            me was the car was a cage; that I hated history; that I'd never learn to go backward, even for his mother’s marriage rings, even to reach any day before now when he was healthy, my aunt wasn’t living with us, my mom was helpful, sweet and pretty, not lying about with a snootful, and 1 was simply a kid who was happy and had happy folks and maybe a dog.
                                    I get behind the wheel when I fail to cop a feel.
                                  To compensate for this I pretend I cannot miss any rabbit, dog, or toad who dares to cross the road.
              What in the world is the matter with you? You mean to say you can't locate the spare? Point to the battery, Billy. Well, open the glove compartment, for god’s sake. At least you know what the rearview mirror’s for? Come on, Billy, what’s the matter with you? Where are the tools kept? What does this red mark mean? no, the red line. The simplest quiz disclosed a complex system of ignorance, clearly achieved with effort and intention, a system I didn’t want violated, a system I seemed ready to defend even in the face of his wrath. It amounted to a denial so deep he could not reach it, even with the increasing length of his alarm. What . . . is the . . . what... the what with you?
              At this time, my father also discovered my rather unusual relation to the road map.
              It unnerved him. There was no original way for him to respond. After I told him, gave him the details, played my trick, he simply spluttered with conventional incomprehension and disbelief.
              When I had barely begun to read, and scarcely knew what a road map was, I had seen in a store a statue covered with red and blue lines and wide patches of brown and green. This, 1 was told, was the anatomy man, used in school instruction, and that he was made of layers of skin and nets of nerves and organs of breathing and digestion. 1 too looked like that beneath God’s overclothes. It was scary. And when I scraped my knee, the blood appeared in an ugly puddle of confirmation. The road map looked to me exactly like the picture the anatomy man was wrapped in: lines of red and blue, patches of brown and green, nets of nerves and organs of breathing and digestion. It was scary.
              Eventually I learned to peruse a map like any normal person, and not break into a sweat simply at the sight of its irreversible unfolding. Now I know what the numbers in the white shields stand for, as well as the less pretentious routes in the round. Road widths and city sizes no longer puzzle me, either, or the lakes
       I took for organs, and the shadings which merely mean rise, hill, mountain, sudden declivity, or the flat green patches which represent those national forests 1 was formerly so pleased to enter. County borders made of dots and dashes don’t dismay me, and 1 can stare a coastline straight in its cerebrally shaped face and say, ah, there's New London, Roanoke Island, Chesapeake Bay. All the labels, little and large, I must confess, still distract me, and 1 can never connect name with feature satisfactorily, getting Tippecanoe County confounded with the river, and the battlefield with the wrong presidential campaign.
          But back then, when my father decided to teach me to drive, though I could read a map, and disguise from my teachers my nervous condition, I still saw, as if the unfolded sheet were a scrim, an actual body of ground, with its deepest nakedness depicted, its nets of knowledge, organs of osculation, its faintly green pastures of received opinion fully represented, those darkly dotted centers of passion, too, or irregular areas of irritation, while habits of hoping and holding on, keeping pets and making friends, were laid out in front of me the way a quilt’s design sometimes repeats the cultivated patterns of the land. Try as I might to suppress the confusion, I nevertheless saw, in its methodical print, points where suggestions of illicit sensation had been symbolized, and could locate swampy crosshatched places of depravity and decay, or find where the earth's equipment of procreation was iconically revealed like a penis drawn on the side of a cave, large as a vulgar brag, or, in the same space, where a dreamt breast had been recently released from its pocket behind a blouse; yes, unless I blinked to jiggle my natural response back to normal, in each green graphic of a piney tree I’d spot the presence of a public park where a whole set of secrets was blatantly displayed. Thus a fanciful reason for my father’s love of driving was, in this odd way, lodged in me; it was the concealed cause and therefore the real one; for he was uncovering the country when he traveled, and feeling its features with his wheels.
          Impatient as a puppy, but not in a puppy’s playful mood, my father pushed me into the driver’s seat and said, You are going to begin by backing the car out of the garage, just as you've seen me do so often; then you are going to back all the way down the drive into the street, just as you’ve seen me do it a thousand times. Then you'll pull back into the drive again. That’s the first lesson. All back. We 11 start easy. Don’t worry. (He’d seen my look of consternation.) I’ll sit alongside.
          Which meant that all his pads had to be moved and rearranged. His pain and his rage made the pads sag when they sat beside me.
          In my father's view (since the first thing he did when he drove he did in the garage) I should begin by putting my knob in neutral and turning the key to start the car give it some gas for god s sake—by imagining I was shifting the
           stick into reverse while pushing the clutch appropriately in, by looking carefully in the rearview mirror, gazing circumspectly in the stem-held side glass, first one then the other, though they weren’t really adjusted for me, next turning my head way around to the right—no, jesus, not to your left, not out of the window, always inside, the center, stare right out of the center of the rear window, got that? what a simpleton—then ease the clutch, give it a little gas at the same time, ease the clutch, jeez, you’re going too fast, no, not like that, don’t stop like that, you’d have stalled the car if this were the Packard, can’t you concentrate? okay do this button, push it in, no, too fast slow down brake not jeez not like that well at least we’re not moving now, where were you all the time you were riding in cars? for years! let’s try again, easy on the gas, god, don’t back over the lawn, shit, steer, stop, that’s your mother’s bush, no, hey, stop, the curb, oh my god you’ve put us in the middle of the street, 1 can’t drive this thing while sitting over here, not in my condition, what have you done to my car, you dunder? that’s your mother’s bush, wherever it is, are we standing on it? push the forward button number one dummy and put this car back in the drive not over the bush again 1 said not over the bush again god over the bush again, what a kid, he ain’t mine.
              My first lesson was my. last. My father pushed his painful body from the passenger’s seat and slowly stood and surveyed the car’s scratches where we had passed over—back and forth over—what had formerly been a forsythia. My aunt—I will never forgive her—had been watching from the front step. My father carried his seat pads painfully to the driver’s side and resat himself with time and difficulty in order to drive the Dyna down the drive and back into its garage like some cowboy star holstering his gun.
              Damn you. Damn you, Doris. I said.
              Being a Bigot
             My father was unable to teach me how to drive, nor did his bravery in the grip of pain produce any satisfying imitation. 1 was never able to fill my face with his kind of hateful countenance—so compelling—nor could I match his vituperative skills, the stream of complaint of which he was capable, possibly because much of it was directed at me. I was sportless, unhandy, an indoors-man, mental. But I did learn from my father how to be a bigot.
             I am aware that bigotry is often loosely defined as a kind of intellectual and moral intolerance, but the dictionary is never right, always deferring to the
      mob. You can't be bigoted about your brother even if he’s an envied Abel and you are akin to Cain. Nor is bigotry blind, as is often asserted. It may tell only half the story, but the story it does tell is true. Nor will any sort of opinion, just because it is fanatically held, qualify as a club in the bigot’s bag of tricks. If I remain stubbornly opposed to fluoridation, 1 am not, on that account, a bigot. Bigotry is directed toward persons. It does not believe in abstract universals. Bigots, as opposed to racists, achieve scope by hopping from particular to particular like a toad from pad to pad across a pond. Bigots also consider themselves empiricists. Their attitudes are based—they believe—purely on experience. They believe in the signal instance, outstanding examples. Whether a fact is a fact, though, depends upon its value. Which is mainly moral. Thus a bigots beliefs strengthen a fragile superiority. Again, unlike a racist, a bigot is not nearly as concerned with his own truths (which he takes to be traits of his character) as he is with the falsehoods of others (which he takes to be traits of theirs). The truth, he fears, is impotent, its belief futile, though he wouldn't care to say so in so many words, thereby giving comfort to his enemies, whereas error is like an epidemic, insidious, swift, overwhelming, unstoppable. The bigot believes in details, in specifics. So let me get to the teachings of my father.
         It was not my father's rant which was instructive, it was his reactions. They were litmussy. For instance, there is his response to the intrusive stranger. In the lobby of a hotel or on a railroad platform, you expect to see people you don't know, and that is why none of them are strangers. They are simply people you don’t know. When the empty lot next to my father’s house was sold it was sold to a chinaman, which was my father’s name for someone not only unknown to him, but unknowable, a stranger who would always be a stranger—a person permanently out of place—a stranger, worse yet, to whom my father was an alien. He treats me like a foreigner in my own town, on my own street, on my own damn lawn. Had the chinaman merely passed, like Halley’s comet, into the solar night . . . had he . . . but he did not; he wanted to build a house on the lot he had recently purchased. This man was very tall, very thin, very sallow, very polite. He went down the block, from house to house, introducing himself and explaining his plans. Creating more suspicion than had he been dressed like a burglar. He should have worn horns, my dad declared. Then I would have offered him a beer. He wore instead a suit cut like a carnival barker’s, with lapels, my father said, wide enough to walk on.
         Maybe that’s the way they do things where he comes from, 1 said. Yeah? Well he's not where he came from now because he came from there, now he’s here, and now he has to do what we do or repack his camels and go home, my dad responded. Or git. Thats what he actually said. With all his smokes. My father
            adopted a kind of made-up movie vernacular to express disdain. Git. However, there was no sign he had accepted any of these proffered alternatives: the stranger was clearly going to remain strange. His friends, all thin, all tall, all sallow, had a bonfire on the lot he’d bought, and blew tin whistles and clapped their hands. They held a plot-clearing party, chopped down weeds and small trees, burned the branches green. Appalling all who looked on through the smoke from curtained upstairs windows. The chinaman now had a name: Toot-toot. His thin tall sallow wife got a name too, one I wasn't supposed to hear: Toottwat.
              Father was furious when he found out that the plans Mr. Toottoot had flourished in everybody's face, when he’d come so ceremonially round, were of a sort of Cape Cod saltbox, wholly out of keeping with the two-story plain frame tent-peaked houses which made up the neighborhood. Well, 1 said, it will at least present the right height to the street. Yeah? and what will we see every day for the rest of our lives? its slopehead side. One thing which had riled my father had been Mr. Toottoot’s attitude: he wasn’t asking our permission; he was congratulating us on our good fortune. We were going to live luckily next to—my father’s nomenclature—Toottoot's Squatbox. The chinaman should put up a sign out front, my father suggested: Mr. Toottoot’s Toottwat’s Squat-box. So we could all know why we were proud.
              The Squatbox would lower the resale value of the surrounding property; it wasn't according to code; a lawyer would stop it in its muddy tracks. But nobody wanted to foot the bill by themselves. Or spend the energy or invest the time. My father tried to organize the neighborhood, the block. But if residents were out of eyesight of the prospective eyesore, they were indifferent. Others feared lawyers the way they feared snakes, and felt fees would grow more rapidly obnoxious than the foreigners. Much of my father's wrath was thereby diverted. Meanwhile, although the house was not according to code, its construction went ahead. Strange thin men came and poured a pad. It was all very sudden. Toottoot’s not even going to have a basement. We all have basements. What kind of cover are they putting on the ground? A slab, a neighbor to whom my father was still talking said, a hut on a slab like a corpse in the morgue.
              My father’s vigilance was now continuous, his eye sharp, his fury fueled. He noticed that the workmen who came to pour and smooth the base of Toottoot’s Tomb, as the house was now called, spoke the same gibberish as Toottoot did (why not English, we knew Toottoot spoke English, he spoke English when he came calling, English with an odd English accent, so what was up? to keep their secrets secret of course, hide their plans). My father furthermore saw physical similarities between the workers and their so-called client, and a camaraderie which could only mean one thing: they were related. One Toottoot meant many.
       Wouldn t you know? Moreover, they were clanbaking, as my father put it. You watch, that house 11 be built by Toottooter’s big and little brothers.
          Naturally, being strangers, they felt more at home with their own kind, could make themselves understood, felt a reassuring trust for one another they could not yet extend to the sometimes suspicious citizens of their adopted land. 1 offered this opinion to my father. Right, he said. They stick together. To foreignness and intrusiveness add clannishness, which meant that one Toot brought more, more and more made for many, and instead of being able to do at least a little business with these bozos, since Toottoots trusted only other Toottoots like themselves, you had to watch them make their little nation, do business only with themselves, and set up their own shops in competition. At this time, traits and other qualities of character, habits and customs, distinguishing physical marks, were carefully observed and systematically sorted out. Tall, thin, sallow, smug, superior, tribal, clothed like an escapee from the circus, these people were truly geekish, with high-pitched voices given to clicking sounds, a fondness for whistles and clapping their hands when happy, and the custom of keeping forbidden chickens in illegal cages: thus the list began to grow, and as the work went on and people came and went, the traits my father naturally detested seemed to enlarge themselves, increasing his revulsion; meanwhile he added others.
          It was observed (and no one turned a blind eye or made things up—not yet) that they had two sorts of manners: a familiar, slap-hands, easy way with one another, and a stiff even regal politeness with others, which was taken as a sign of their superciliousness, their condescension.
          Why a saltbox, this ain t Cape Cod, my father wondered with derision, as the odd object grew beside us. Perhaps it reminds them of the houses of their homeland, I said. People tend to resettle in resembling places if they can—in a sympathetic landscape, familiar climate, and where they can resume their occupations, continue their customs, lean on helpful friends, and so on—I had studied geography and knew how to answer when quizzed. This sort of street can t be found anywhere in Azjurbazur, or wherever they're from. Saltboxes 1 bet are unique to Cape Cod, and Toottoot ain’t a Codder. Why are you sticking up for them? 1 claimed to be neutral neither sticking up for them nor running them down; I said 1 was neither pro nor con. I know—nee nor, nee
       nor just to be different, my father said, only to annoy—nee nor, nee nor___get
       my goat.
          Well, they weren’t going to show up at the local church in checkered Sunday duds, where they weren’t welcome anyway; but everyone got angry when it became clear that loottoot and his friends had ceremonies, did things to living chickens (we suspected geekism from the first), with nary a roof over their
            heads yet; nevertheless on Wednesday about dusk they would put on piratical caps and parade around the incompletely cleared lot tootling like crazy, swaying, clapping their hands high over their heads. Its like having roaches, my father said, every time you look there's more of them.
              My father held his nose. The weather is nice, why shouldn’t they cook out of doors, have picnics in their backyard, 1 said just to get his nanny. Back or front, it’s all mud, my father said sourly, and have you smelled it—that smoke’ll turn your nose into a dirty chimney. My mother said, so shocked she felt the disturbance even beneath her gin, They dress their bushes in underclothes. They’re just draped there to dry, 1 explained. My god, my father said, haven’t they heard of rope?
              Toottwat appeared to be pregnant. They’ll multiply like rabbits, roaches, rodents; they'll overrun us; they don’t live at our rate; they don’t have our standards; they care only for their own kind; they’ve got a religion that’s worse than idolatry or atheism; they are building what they call a Clap Hands Hall down the road; they’re rabbits, roaches, rodents; they’ll overrun us; they don’t live at our rate; they don’t have our standards; they make rugs out of old rags; they care only for their own kind; they are selling furniture made from the wood of packing boxes; all 1 know is that cook smoke!! turn your nose into a sooty chimney, and they dress their bushes in underclothes. They are doing a big business, 1 can tell you, in pennywhistles.
              Yes, at first 1 found my father’s fury foolish, typically half-cocked, old-fashioned, stick-in-the-mud like that salt-in-the-box. But he and his neighbors, incompetent as they were in their resistance, were nevertheless right. The strangers were strangers; they were intrusive; they were clannish; they wouldn’t give an inch; they did have a double standard—one for us and one for them; they encouraged their kids to continue with their own language, to maintain their own customs and habits while pretending to live in our land, when they were clearly here only to make a profit; their cook smoke smelled frightful; their living quarters were egregious eyesores; and it wasn’t long before they became economically competitive, unfairly so, undercutting us, favoring their friends, grimly pushing their way into every conceivable venture, outscoring us at school while failing, with their frail physique, to provide the football team with tackles, and, with their other more intellectual interests, refusing to furnish the basketball team with thin tall sallow centers who could shoot the hook and hit the hoop.
               Eventually, the facts began to slip away into the realm of myth, where all facts go in order to remain immortal. Tooters fucked on the front lawn; they shat in twiggy thickets. They tortured their chickens and read the future in their entrails. Mostly, through, the real enough traits of the Toottoot tribe were
       made more pronounced through this scrutiny, their numbers multiplied, their nefariousness exaggerated, their influence rendered ubiquitous. Yet whose fault was that? It was the fault, my father said, of those who let these people into the country in the first place, when there were few enough jobs, little enough food, shrinking opportunities, a small number of positions of prominence, already enough spies, bohunks, wops, and kikes to go around. My father thought that, from an upstairs window, we might spill paint down the Toottoots chimney. He talked about releasing moles in their garden (which had got embarrassingly lush). Maybe we ought to have a dog, one which could outbark, outshit theirs, and give back growl for growl, since they had brought with them an ugly black cur my father had already, and uselessly, complained to the authorities about.
         The Toottoots, it was believed, were here only to make money which they were sending back to “the old country,” wherever that was—somewhere in the middle of Africa or Asia, somewhere inherently benighted, dirty, out-of-touch, where even the rivers and mountains were an odd shape and ran odd ways. The Toottoots were soon observed starting up small convenience stores in nigger town. These family-run shops—natch—sold sour milk, stale bread, dented canned goods and other railroad salvage, off-brand soda, hijacked cigarettes, day-old newspapers, moldy candy, bootleg liquor, and secondhand condoms for more than the going rate. Why do the coons put up with them is what 1 don't understand, my father said, shaking an honestly puzzled head.
         The Toottoots held parades to celebrate obscure homeland holidays and heroes, where they dressed in native Tootsuits; danced native dances during which they spun around in dizzying circles and the girls showed their thin sallow knees, sold smelly dishes of disagreeable food whose ingredients were unidentifiable-just brown and fatty lumps always in a pool of juice—bits which they extracted and ate with the two fingers custom permitted them to use.
         So why shouldn’t my father and his friends resent the Toottoots and ill-will their plans? My father hated unions, of course, but the Toots would volunteer as scabs. With crime spilling out of mick and wop slums into decent neighborhoods, why should my father and his friends have to endure still more from the whistlewhinnies, and pay for their poor, and put their kids through school? It’s true that only a generation ago, my father’s parents were immigrants, too, but they were good Europeans, came from its noblest, if almost newest, country, and were never a drag on the national economy. We became Americans, my father proudly said, and that was certainly true, because neither he nor my mother knew enough German to ask for wurst, my interest in the language was another of my obnoxious traits, they drank little beer and hated both sauerkraut and sausage—the culture had certainly been
            cleaned from their clothes. So I want to see signs, my father said, that these Toots are anxious to disappear into the Stars and Stripes; I want to see them begin to eat decent, put on a little weight, obey the law, stop keeping chickens, making that acrid smoke; 1 want them to start hating their relatives like regular people, and try to control those hyperactive cocks they've got— Toottwat’s always got a bun in her oven; 1 want them to silence their dog, encourage some shortness in their daughters-in-law, put a little color in their cheeks, cease wearing those silly paper hats, start observing our holidays, getting their tall kids on our teams.
               They painted the saltbox pink—all in one day—fifty sickly skinnies showed up with rags wrapped around the bristle ends of brooms, and buckets of paint the color of toothpaste spit, which they then swabbed on the shingles quick as a drizzly shit, and before anyone could cry out or object. More slowly, more carefully, the windows were trimmed in a deeper pink, reaching red, although a lot of paint got smeared and spattered on the glass to no one’s concern or care. That’s when my father formulated his plan to pour pigments down the Toottoots’ chimney—by the gallon, first red, then white, then blue, by god, in honor of the country.
               I suppose they think pink is festive, I said; I imagine all the houses are pink in their country. There are no pink houses in any country, my father declared, for if one appears it is burnt by the righteous, burnt to the bloody ground. With all responsible inside. Their ashes spread on the beds of plants that prefer an alkaline soil. Why did they paint it pink, a neighbor wailed, looks like a hunk of bubblegum. It’s a box, right? well, I’m sure it’s the color of Toottwat’s twat, my father said, quite losing control of himself and forgetting his child who was present, his little teenage high school kid who presumably didn’t know twat from tootsie.
               But mainly the neighbors felt that what was going on was simply and plainly not fair. This was their little town; they had built it; defended it; determined its nature. Now their homes were being threatened, their livelihoods, too, by these tall skinny baboons. This was their reward for being good citizens, patriots, workers. They were America, damn it, and Americans should come first. First, Last, and March in Time, my father chanted.
               Later in my life, though not by many years, back in my come-from country, in my grandfatherland, over my rebellion against my father (though not my hatred of his ghost), 1 came to realize my old man was right to be a bigot. The bigot is a person who has suffered an unmerited injustice, one which hasn't been put right, and woe to others if he ever has a chance to get his own back, and take what has long been his—property, power, and honor from those who have traduced his principles and scorned his manner of existence.
         When one has been treated unfairly, not in a single transaction, but in the fundamental opportunities and course of one’s life—when the burgeoning fruit finds a worm feasting on its core—then fairness falls from the vocabulary, as far as the enemy and their agents of disgrace and betrayal are concerned. “They" offend your sight. “It” sticks in your craw. The injustice of “this” or that burns in the belly. There has been, it is felt (certainly my father felt it), an implicit promise broken, the social contract itself, for the nation was supposed to reward the industry, lawfulness, loyalty, and sacrifices of its citizens, not some skinny Tootie-come-latelys: strangers with strange ways, parasites, scabs, seducers—jesus save us—chickengeekers, saltyboxers, whistlewhin-nies, just to begin the list.
         Toottoots were forbidden me. Had 1 wished to form a friendship with one, say another chap my age (and the Toots who spoke English said “chap”), it would have been difficult and done on the sly. The Toots were leery of us, of course; they called us “gees,” after our habit of saying “gee whiz," I think, but my father felt certain the name would never catch on. Some people have called us Prots, he said proudly, a term hardly disturbing and of no real currency, jews say “goys,” but that goes too far, casts too wide a net to catch our character. You will notice that although we have many spoiled young ladies, no one calls them PAPs. No, that is the point. There are no names for us because no one cares if our noses hook or our brows slope. We are the real Americans, Yankees, if you like, natives now, and belong to none of the discarded trash of another country, flag, or skin shade.
         But the tall thin gray-green Toottoots had, it was rumored, long, thin, pink-tipped sallow dongs. We Just Knew they fucked a lot, and kept at it for as long as they were tall. Actually Toots, who had heads of lank hair like dirty wet mops, seemed to fancy fuzzy little blondes whose creamy complexions promised pink nips and honeyed cunts.
         In my father’s world, pink became a hated color. A pink handprint, put on a paper or a wall, was a sign of derision, a threat, a cross burned before a house, a growl in the gut. They skin their pricks back so their pricks will look pink, some said. They color their straw ceremonial wine pink on special days, others maintained, the way the begorras drink green beer.
         But I have described only the outside of a bigot, the causes of his coming into being, not the internal condition of the mind, the cruelty of the consciousness which such cultural collisions create. Nor have I outlined an ideology, the ideas and arguments which make a racist, for a racist can hate without an object. Niggers are despised in towns which have never been soiled by their shadow. The Jew has been feared, like the bugaboo, by many who will never have paid them interest, or bought shoddy in one of their shops.
             The bigot is a boiler building a head of steam. When the bigot is chastised for his behavior, no one takes account of the fire which is burning beneath him. When the bigot blows, only his victims receive sympathy, only the boiler is blamed. More injustice is, that way, collected like logs for the fire. In order to understand a bigot from the inside, you need to know what it is like to have a set of feelings you prize beyond price, and of which you are at the same time ashamed. You prize them because they are all that sustain you: the record of the crimes against you, the history of your years of endurance, the broken promises you have replaced with the one youve now made to yourself: a kingdom to come, with revenge as reward. That promise and your continued impotence make you patient, very patient, inside the rhetoric of your wrath; it is a patience which your day-to-day peevishness merely hides.
             The bigot cannot simply possess his hatred as he might own a house or car; it is ultimately all he loves, all he cares for, all he tends, and he loves it like an illicit passion, as he loves himself, since it gives him his nature, his name, his opprobrium—yes, as ambiguously as that—knowing how widely he is scorned for it, knowing he will be reviled—he, the unfairly burdened, the unjustly treated—knowing his devotion will doubtless prove vain; nevertheless it will last his leftover life; it will set him, as a bigot, apart (why not? he is someone apart already); he will suffer for his belief, his truth; for the bitter fact is he has been wronged, he knows in his loins; he has been grievously injured, he repeats like a heartbeat; he has been wronged without any recognition of that wrong, a wrong which is denied, as his head says obsessively to his mind—denied, yes, denied at the same time as his suffering is denied, along with his response to his loss, his efforts at restitution, those too—his labor, his loyalty, his love of the land, denied, ignored, rejected by others, who cannot give him an inch, who cannot confess there might be a tittle of truth to what he says, to what he claims, to the loathsome images of others which he projects, because they, too, are consumed by a secret guilt, by an inner admission of the rejected bigot's plight; no, the bigot is a bore for he has but one subject on which he dwells like a squatter; he is benighted because he is supposed to see nothing but stereotypes, speak in slogans, and conceive only through cliches; he is anathema because—like the Jew—he is a reminder of history s crimes; he bears witness to what has been taken away, removed without recompense, without a just and adequate reason, only so a problem might be solved, only so some other social guilt can be assuaged, elsewhere a conscience eased, as if he had been forced to yield a kidney to an enemy, to save that life and put his own at risk. Ah, these—the bigots—these are the backbone of the Party of the Disappointed People.
        They wait their time like a disease of the genes. For them, good times are the bad times, when, victimized by war, impoverished by a runaway inflation, wiped out by a market s fall or some generic financial panic, cheated on one occasion too many by businessmen and bankers, lied to like the last smirk laid on their credulity by some campaigning politician, fired from their job in midlife, or bilked of the savings that were to guard their old age; in tough times, in times which seem to multiply like times, people other than the bigot—the bigots'judges, who scorned them and poked fun and made up mischief—many people, finding themselves in breadlines, disgraced, abruptly poor, objects of unwanted yet necessary welfare; they who used to dole out the dole themselves from the dippers of their charity, and now receive it; such people, their numbers mounting, finally feel that fundamental disappointment which feeds the members of my party and is the bitter tea they drink, the stimulant that stirs their heart at last: hate, disappointment, loss, betrayal; for what had been offered them, what was their birthright? (happiness is not an answer, far too vague and dim to be a distant aim), what swaddled their spirit as it developed, gave comfort and hope? sure, the pleasures of sex, the rewards of successful work, the comforts of security, the assurances of pride family, place, respect, now scratched from a shortened future, erased from a disgraced past—what was?—why, all that one had, all that one hoped for, all that one remembered without remorse, yes, it was scraped from the present, as if ail one had been, had tried, had done, lay like something left uneaten on a soiled plate, and was thus swept into that pit that holds the forgetfulness and ingratitude of their country.
        The bigot is born with a fear of failure; the likelihood of that difficult, unpleasant fate is drummed into him by a tyrannical embittered father, who speaks to him daily of his shortcomings; who punishes his ineptitude, forgetfulness, recalcitrance as he would be pleased to pain the world; who sees, it seems, into his sullen servant's soul as one looking into a small, dingy, ill-kept, and poorly lighted room; and who rails against conventional reality as his son will later rail, a chain begun; meanwhile the mother is morose and full of self-pity, offering him the vision of his fate, if, losing love, he were also to give up hate; the slope of her life, weighed down by her husband as if he were always pounding her, always on top, perpetually erect, at rape, looks like his is likely to look; and so he lives peering at his feet for his footing, behind him for the shove, ahead of him for obstacles he cannot overcome, while from the sky he expects the betrayal of the gods, and gets it; hence it is natural, one might say it is inevitable, his hold on his worldly position is so precarious that the moment a newcomer appears in his ken, the minute strangeness is encountered, his bladder shrinks, he needs to piss; yes, and
            then as problems mount, both inside himself and out, the spies, the kikes, the spades, the shivs, the Toots, provide the imaginary agent for his homemade ills, as well as the ills—quite real—they bring about.
              That is to say, within the bigot lives, now more closely hoveled than next door, the subject of his scorn, the Toottoot of his interior, but transformed, inside that sequestered environment, into the object of his envy; for the Toot represents the success the bigot was supposed to be, despised by the bigot as the bigot was by his father, yet triumphant in spite of that; because this Toot, as out of form and favor as he is, has done it, is accomplishing the necessary, is clearing his property, building his house, defending a territory, establishing a family, maintaining a life; and how is he doing this, what drives him on to his achievement, if it is not his flight from his country to this new one, if it is not this rebirth of being, this second chance? which in these relentlessly personal terms means the Toottoot’s release from the cell of the bigot’s self, his escape from the soul of his scorner; inasmuch as there is not a single one of these worm-eaten men and women who has not wished to leave themselves behind as though they were a misruled, corrupt, and overcrowded country. My father must have felt hollowed out, rejected by his own hopes, when he looked at these tall, miserably thin and sallow people, nobodies who knew nothing about how to live, bobbing their heads in time to their tintooted music, building within the precincts of my father’s eyes their offensive little box, their first property probably, their first privacy, their only known real home.
              How could his hopes be forgiven their treachery, thus to have abandoned him, for he had not left his father’s side, though his father had rejected him; his own son, so far, has not walked finally out the door into another daylight; no, these queer, these alien people, shaped as strangely as his own insides would appear to him were he, in horror, to see them, like organs of his own laid out for scornful evaluation on a cold enamel tray; they had put up their house in his dishonor, next door so as to mock him and his impotence, to remind him every minute of his loss; after all, look around, daddy, dad, father, look at your sexually uninviting spouse, soused to her underwear, look at your family life, your ungrateful rebellious whelp who opposes you at every turn, who shows you less than no respect, who will stand by your grave and pick his nose and drop the pickings like dust on your coffin, or look at that visitor who has aunt-ie'd her way into your marriage and now is wife over everything, who manages your money, who sees to your meals, who lays out your pills, and, why not? take a gander at this relic of a body, what do you see in the ruins? a place of exhumation, a corpse long covered by dry country, white and cramped and withered as a petrified tree; so look then, what is the summary? all you have (can we call it “to your credit”?), all you have plenty of, is pain.
          Striking out in despair, striking back in rage. What a pool of energy awaits the right voice.
          Bigotry is not confined to the male white race, although, as usual, their practice of it is exemplary. Bigotry is genoid and pandemic. In the first
       place, it was the bigotry implicit in the Toots which turned my father on______
       it made him smell their bad blood and then his own tendencies soon brought out and confirmed those of his neighbors. Bigots beget bigots more readily than sprats beget sprats. Keep in mind that benevolence is a function of security, and tolerance of indifference. So we should expect to find bigots everywhere race, religion, and money continue to matter, and because everywhere the weak are seeking a way out of their weakness. The Spanish Jew is superior to the Polish one, the Swede is contemptuous of the Finn, ghettoed Negroes hate unghettoed Jews who landlord their lives and sell them their shoes, a pale-skinned black, like a shade that’s rolled up in the window, disappears into the white world to the deep annoyance of the more darkly skinned, Baptists lie beneath Episcopalians like dirty paving, among Asians, well, good heavens, who wants to live next to a Korean? and so on. How reassuring it all is.
          Because if we were each as identical as twins, I would scratch your face to hate the scratch which spoiled your looks and improved mine, while you would say the scratch set you apart and made you more interesting, and gave you a purpose in life: to scratch me back a thousand times.
          Political parties exist to organize and institutionalize human weakness. It is their one success. The Nazi movement was a pinnacle, but it peaked only for a moment. Its remnants may hope for more lasting luck next time, but 1 am confident that my group, the PdP, already huge, although a sleeping giant, will wake, will rise, will thrive. Als ob ... als ob ... ah ... yes . . . as if it were a great hall, I hear its songs inside, its standards throng my mind.
          Maybe I’ll write another lecture on the snob, or on racial ideologies. And there is provincialism, chauvinism, and jingoism to be delicately separated and consumed like flaky layers of fish.
          My father was right to hate the Toots. They came, like invaders, unbidden. From his point of view, their every action was a crime. It wasn’t he, however, who set fire to their dog’s house, although my father always hoped for a war between Azjurbazur and the USA, because, in that case, we could intern the Toots, reclaim their property, muzzle their dogs, and sterilize their brats. It wasn’t he, either, who threw paint on their front porch one Halloween, though, as he said, a saltbox shouldn’t have a porch. Even so, Toottoot just left the blobby blue splash dry where it fell as though it were designed. Against people like that, my father said, there is no recourse available in this life.
                                    GOING TO THE RIVER
          The Cost of Everything
                              You may (a) return to your desk, (b) go back to your bench, (c) sit down in your chair, (d) take your seat. Do not choose just one.
              Great washes of timber and flood rubble lay in gray confusion everywhere, clogging the dry streams, though crossing the bottoms where they were still wet was like wading through pumpkin pie. Yet there, in the midst of a score of rivulets like stiff mop strings, I discovered it: the sand, the circuiting, yatter-ing, yellow trees, the graceful arch and delicate shading of the willows, the clear child-sliding water, the privacy and silence of the dragonfly—pale mauve, copper green, electric blue—a heron silent as an angler, and the water strider, silent too, the fish like silver bubbles in the water, those butterflies like ghostly tatters, discreet gray birds, my lustful weeds; and 1 had in my hand at the time as luck would have it a pleasantly porky but certainly mixed-up little girl from my morning class whom I was trying to teach—
                               To this lewd old professor of history our life has a spermy trajectory.
                                We fish for a mate, but ourselves are the bait, though why we do so is a mystery.
            what? to swallow it, but who never learned. She couldn’t handle the Hapsburgs any better. Dynasties did her in: the Ummayyads or Seleucid kings, kissing cousins, blood-sick dukes, pocket duchies, geologic ages, eras, Egypt. Though a small bandage for such a wound—a sour salve, and salty besides—the news was sufficient consolation later. On the other hand, my wife is a master of genealogical botany. She can take a tree in at a glance. She could take in the whole forest if each tree were a twig on some giant branch. She knows the
      presidents by heart, and, of course, the kings of England, Scotland, and France. Intermarriage is her forte. Families may clasp like the pledging hands of athletes about to take the field, still she will trace each finger-wiggle in an instant to its owner. My wife loves to speak, like a Southerner, of her “connections," but little round Rue, my pupil, wished to run from her parents as 1 ran from mine, and hated families as I hate them, and had no head for lineal derivations. Really, when I consider the melting earth, the sog on my shoetops, my splayed prints, I think the blackbirds may be back any day. Marty won't disagree. She wouldn’t dare. She will simply, after arching her eyebrows
                        Yes, class—consider. What, simply, after arching her eyebrows, will Martha do?
        None of her expressions is any more original than the arch. The Romans invented. The Greeks knew only post and beam. Their marble columns mimicked trees. Backs. Thighs. Arms. She finds them on the faces she finds flattened in her magazines, and she tries them on the way I try on trousers. Which way is that? one after another through the whole stack. And? The Roman aqueducts were capable of carrying water over canyons. In England there is one of cast iron a canal coasts over. In Lisbon, lovely. And Segovia. Near Nimes. I have seen her hold both face and photo to her mirror... to her mirror so the mask and its model were mirrored there . . . were mirrored there a moment just like twins (glass sisters, more than friends) before they disappeared in one another like uniting rivers. They were built to last—like the Model T—longer than veins. The Alhambra, too, has splendid plumbing. It wasn’t that the caliphs wanted so abundantly to be clean. They knew what water was—the Arabs. They desired it all around them: fountaining, reflecting, soothing, cooling, softening, contriving green. And since her magazines are mostly devoted, now, to gardening, elegant homes and their tasteful decoration . . as well as? the elegant and tasteful entertainments which can be handed round in them like sensitive silver dishes on shining silver trays . . .
                              There was a professor of history who explained to his class every misery of our human state:
                                          1  war is man’s fate;
                                          2  hate pays for hate;
                                        3  ail help comes too late;
                                        4  our lives don’t relate;
                                 but why this is so stays a mystery.
               In short, to what?
               I am a Full, quite Full, Professor, and have sold a book about the Jews. Consequently my income has gone up, and as it has, Marty's taste in magazines has altered, risen, hasn’t everything? and the expressions on her faces . . . manicured, expensive, suburban, French . . .
               In short, to what?
               In short, to cultivation: each flower, yard, each garden, bathroom, family, friend, each alert glass vase, to be ploughed and planted, scrubbed and painted, raised and arranged, according to the latest in what is best for them. Have you anything further to add to your account at this time? yes. Yes. Since the photos which appear in the pages of these dirty Jewish-sponsored journals are designed, like fun house glass, to reflect only wholesome spints, eager, ardent Aryans and . . . and? their wholesome attitudes ... I wish to remind you that it will go hard with anyone attempting to obstruct this investigation. Herr Kohler, these photos are designed to hide their dark diseased oily skins, their hairy hooked noses, their kinky wool-over niggerish heads, their moist lascivious eyes. In these malicious magazines, even your cock, as you look, seems no longer circumcised. I always told them: create an image! advertise! then they wouldn’t listen. The entire world is attempting to pass . . . become suburbanite ... by means of wholesome attitudes, you were saying. Now then: wholesome attitudes toward what? . . . objects, Herr Kohler, objects . . . merchandise . . . flowers, gestures, garden hoses, ladders, thoughts, perceptions, climbing vines, towels and tennis . . . merchandise . . . dear god, ©(sXaXalS. Didn’t the Jews invent the Hollywoodized life? and, ho ho, the happy ending? and, ha ha, the ever after? Well, since Mrs. Kohler (formerly, quite long ago actually—eons, ages, eras—a richly scutcheoned Muhlenberg, and now a besmirched Martha/Missus/Mummum/Marty/Maid Marion) . . . Well, since Mrs. Kohler buys-purchases-charges/gets-obtains-acquires only ready-mades, her wardrobe of responses (though she has more of passion’s poses hanging on the varnished wooden hangers which comprise her than the children have costumes for Halloween) is consequently limited, and its character frequently rather special. Indeed? Her fur is pinned on like a paper doll’s. You don’t say? My penis enters like a crayon, coloring between the lines. My word. Oh yes, my wife is everywhere wondered at for her unfailingly happy and radiant nature. Which is the result of? has to do with? The sycamores have a radiant nature. Greek columns have a radiant nature. Fulsome fountains, spires of spray Gleaming trunks do. Polished limbs. I certainly receive no credit for it. Why should I? with a smile like a flat tire rolling off its rim.
               So you’ve imagined. T or F? So I’ve been told.
               And I’m thought to be extraordinarily lucky (“You’ve a wonderful woman there, Bill, boy, a wonderful lady, laddie, what a lay”) to bask in such unbroken
      sunshine, even though 1 do seem perpetually pale, with that bad smile like the teeth of refugees on hunger posters.
        So I imagine. R or W? So you’ve been told.
        I should go to the seashore for my health, sleep on a wave, stay in the sun till I look like sand. The reason? because 1 spend so much of my time (my heart hurts, I’ve holes in my lungs, my pee steams) on those grim German things, that neolithic Nazi nonsense (my ears ring, my joints ache, my skin grows bruises like grass). Cast away on the gray knockers of my wife. And what is a woman for if not to be the sun, the sea, and the seashore? Aqua’s ducts. Crossing in the iron trough, you feel afloat on a palm like the tray of a waiter. Water and air are the same. Like a slice of lemon lily-padding in a teacup: don’t look down. Though the Greeks discovered, the Romans constructed. I helped draw up the dossiers. 1 questioned people, gathered documents; I took statements. Cleverly, 1 collected incriminations, just as I do now, by appearing sympathetic, a little inclined in the same direction, with a bit of Brown Shirt bent or bias. Oh, 1 led them on from insinuation to denunciation, or 1 got them, in confidential moods, to go too far, as the case may have required, and show themselves for what they were, or worse, for what they wanted to become or liked to dream they'd been. They considered me one of the nurses of Nuremberg, later a lawyer, when all the while I was a hanging hizzoner ... an historian. And what is a teacher for if not to be accuser, counselor, courtroom, jury, yellow gutter journalist, frontier judge? I’m thought to be somewhat ungrateful, too (“Billboy, I hope you appreciate what a marvel your Martha is, such a fine and well-connected family, with such hips”). Jutting from the North Sea: rocks. Across the wrist of a waiter: a shining white napkin. Please understand that 1 wouldn’t blame you a bit if you were, but are you ungrateful? yes. She’s sly. She hands me her hatred done up like a fruitcake soaked six months in sherry. Countless raisins, nuts, and candied cherries. And you accept that? she knows I like the wine. She sugars her scorn like cereal and butters her spite like a bun. Her spit is thin cream. She shits jam. Why? because everything she knows, says, or does is a gift. She posts her body to me like a bomb for Christmas, flesh wrapped in flesh to make me eager, bones wadded with fat to muffle the tick. In his youth Napoleon was a whiz at what? math.
        Usually she appears to be standing in an open colonial doorway. And she is ... ? graciously about to greet guests. Or? crisply aproned, spoon in hand, she is gazing rapturously at you from beside her fridge, or she is resting her plump butt on the bumper of a Buick sedan. No, you’re wrong: she represents the spring; it is the car that’s love. When I was a boy the kids called me Billyballs.
        How weary, by nightfall, her bras must be.
        Her come-hither gaze is notorious and has been copied from an image advertising some radical new food for the face, a substance found, I think she
            said, in frogs, or stolen, was it? from the turtles, or ground up out of buzz-exhausted bees.
               Like a slow lantern show, her expressions change.
               And the sight of her Buick look being beamed up at you from between welcoming knees can turn the stiffest prick to string.
               She’s off to shop. The price of everything . . . the cost ... 1 hear the door slam: thannk. 1 think: aaaah. Why? because Culp is a criminal and his criminality is catching. He straws his teeth with a stiff weed. He walks like a squeaky coaster wagon. He tells a tiresome story in tinny Chinese. Zzzzz, he says the zipper goes. 1 am amazed. He mimes his noises too. Kerkachew. He puffs, bends, and trembles. Kerkachew. I’ve never heard, in all his sounds, a single original tone—the bassoon’s for instance, or the steady low strum of an electric clock. Night and day his mouth motors as if we were all roads he was driving over, and his teeth, his cheeks, his nose, they motor too. Roo-ah-roo-ah-roo-ah-roooo-uh. Sexually, he’s stuck in the twenties—this girl swings in, he says (Culp sashays), zazz-zu-zazz—while his notions of violence, chase and pursuit, come straight from the early cartoons. The rest of his repertoire is the common property of childhood: machine guns, bombing planes, and death rattles. The way he grows them, Culp boasts, radishes pop from the ground the moment the seeds go in: thonk! and his thumb springs from his fist like someone shooting marbles. Thannk. God. Her go is my come. Ssssspitat. Why, when you were a boy, did your boy friends call you Billyballs? no reason, for no reason.
               I appreciate that answer. Thank you.
               I can close my eyes and these books become their faces; the words I write fill my mouth as though I were speaking or eating them. Which? 1 always find that my imagination moves me easily from prison to prison: study, office, class, bath, bedroom—swivel chair or toilet stool—there is an indiscernible difference; but when 1 would draw the snow back like a curtain and look out upon my island and my sand again, dreaming of sunshine like someone lonely waiting at a window, or when I would wear your hair so close to me it might indeed be mine, well, 1 ash the manuscript instead—nerves, nerves again, nerves nerves—and my thumb jumps—there's no passage, no exit from this chair— my cough is a classroom interruption, that dark branch in the window there the bone of a questioner’s arm. My pictures are confinements: Rue’s wild eyes when she left me, the curse she gave me like a bite on the shoulder: still I should not complain. 1 had an island once, lay naked as a walrus on it—who can say as much?—and it was in the middle of this shoreless land, too, where we know water as a rule only in terms of flooded gutters or meadows as wet to their rims as saucers. I cannot complain. Yet I do. I do.
                         The problems of my profession (circle the appropriate responses): (1) jollying Jews, (2) coping with Culp,
                       (3) never-minding Nazis, (4) husbanding Martha and harnessing history, (5) glorifying goys, (6) seducing my students,
                       (7) counting the cost, (8) putting up with philanthropy.
         Rue would either let my prick slip away at the first sign of its summiting so it was suddenly a falling man, without support or sensation, and my sperm spilled like a series of screams across her chin and down her neck or flew like salt thrown over her shoulder; or she would sit there a moment with pouched surprised cheeks before opening her mouth and pushing the spunk into her palms as you might sweep out a store after hours. Then, of course, she had slimy hands, and she would sit on the grass with her skirt carefully arranged around her and hold them out like cup and pencils, pleading for a wipe. I don’t want you to think you haven’t got the dearest doodle. How it used to anger me to see it spit so futilely, but a good instructor should never lose patience, and 1 was a good instructor—it was my pupil who was punk. That was a splendid try; you are improving. Am I? Am 1, really? I don’t understand Austria at all. What is Putsch? 1 rose as the sea rose. Few do, my dear. Tides rise. Correct. There is an ebb and flow. I’m having a terrible time with the Hapsburgs, she said, her hair looping over her face in long untidy lanks the way some bushes turn their branches into tents the trunks then skulk in. What is coup? She hid her eyes behind that flop of hair or behind dark glasses of various tints or otherwise she simply closed the lids. I'm having a horrible time. She had a raincoat wrapped around her and colliding toes—which meant that beneath all the muffle her knees met and her fat thighs kissed. 1 never got them to part, though I tried. From time to time I felt obliged to make some gesture in that direction, as if to acknowledge she was a woman. She didn’t mind. Her fingertips were clean because she bit her nails. The ends were pale as a nigger’s palms. My mother had a brow like Ruth’s—so high it seemed she was going bald. Where have we seen pictures of cliffs like Gib's? My mother groaned when her nails broke and drank gelatin to strengthen them; then gin for her nerves. She powdered that high brow like a heroine who's Japanese, and lacquered her long nails an orange-red from cuticle to cutting edge, eclipsing the moons, but not quite hiding the dark line of dirt that was packed up under them like cracks in the sidewalk. My aunt used to manicure mine, forcing the skin back with a wooden stick, smoothing each end, and buffing their surfaces until they shone. Blackbirds wear red badges on their shoulders like division patches. And my nails shine still—well tended, young. No thumb-sucker's marks mar the thumb which holds my pen to its work, though I smoke to calm my nerves, thus there
           are stains on the ball of it and between my fingers where the tube is wedged. Also 1 often chew the barrel of my pen, and I bite my knuckles, even the slack skin on the back of my hand sometimes, to express great tension, and to quiet down, though barrel chewing is mostly nerves, since I type when I write, unless it's checks or letters or notes or privacies 1 want to basket as soon as spelled. Her housecoat as unkempt as her house, her hair wild as though regretting its grayness, my mother would sit on the edge of the sofa, sniffing a bit—she had a chronic cold then—and carefully apply another coat of lacquer to the nails she no longer filed or drank gelatin to defend, her touch light as a fly’s now that she’d moved her mouthfuls up into the morning, and steady against the gale that was constantly blowing through the bedroom and rushing down the stairwells to the basement, as though a falling river of wind ran through the house, 1 always thought; she had a chronic cold then and kept a hankie hid in the ball of her fist while she tinted her nails so that when she fanned her fingers to admire their glow the cloth fell more slowly than paper, and 1 always thought her hand in those moments had all the careless unconcern of a shitting bird; moreover she would often foot the fabric from her with the same indifference, or she would carry the cloth, caught on a toe of her slipper, into another room before scuffing its release. How does water float upon the soul when you drown? As for myself, I was with the First Army, and 1, together with the rest of the boys, killed many Germans. We never saw them, of course; they were nicely out of face-range; and Ruth’s hands were, weren’t they? stubby; but a baby did no worse or better, except that a baby can get its entire fist in its mouth (I could inhale the whole of one of Marth’s soft spongy tits until she put on weight, it was like swallowing a balloon), and since Ruth was continually leaving me notes on gray paper like a spy, her fingers were streaked with such stains as come from overmuch writing. She suffered from what of the following: gout, stone, colic, or consumption? and the poor thing thought it thrilling to embrace trees, walk barefoot through dewy grass, weave straw, tie granny knots in dyed cloth, and make bouquets of weeds. Her favorite food was? milk . . . also ice cream, sour cream mixed with cottage cheese, marshmallow, soft chocolate candy. All the notes she sent me were obscene. Her fingers played with my penis as though mine were the first one she had fondled, but 1 made a point of treating her as a psychopathic liar. Didn’t 1 make up stories in my youth to live in, and didn t I swim through books, too, the way 1 sank to the bottom of the Y pool, turning over slowly in a stream of seltzer bubbles like a tablet for the tummy? In the world of water there was more air. In huge yellow glasses she would reflect me, as though mine were the first one she had seen, but I made a point of paying no attention to her, just as 1 missed—carelessly overlooked, neglected to notice, failed to observe—where my mother hid her whiskey;
        answer: in her handbag with the broken handle, dressed as aspirin, cuticle corrective, gargle; stuffed halfway down a dirty yellow sock which was then sunk in a sea of laundry like a Spanish prize sent down by pirates; in mashed brown paper bags saved frugally for trash; among her sanitary napkins—yes, she bled a lot, it proved convenient; in a flour tin from which a fifth would emerge in a suit of plaster-white dust like a rolling pin; within the toilet tank where the foil rusted and a half-empty pint would float, banging against the sides when you flushed like a prisoner demanding his release; stuck like a plant in a pot of baked clay more brittle than the bottle; behind a brick in the basement wall or stored up among the fruit jars like one of the years of plenty planned for one of the years of famine; in a drain trap—which took tools; in the gutters of the garage—which required a ladder; in a garbage can of galvanized iron where even a full quart could be safely laid to rest for a short time; among stacks of wood cut by tramps who were then rewarded with cool canned soup and soggy sandwiches; between two pounds of butter on the third floor of the fridge; disguised as maple syrup (which required scotch), or an emptied jar of mayonnaise wisely withheld, along with the lids, for who knew what emergency (something would come up), the gin as clear as air and purer than our water; or under old magazines, flat as a cricket; behind books bought originally because they were full of photographs, tables, charts, and maps, in drawers with spools and buttons, old bridge tallies with gold cords, hand-colored pastel designs on the covers, and columns in India ink drawn up by my father, the numbers as precise as print; then with admirable daring among the empties, like the unknown soldier, she would stand the vodka; or they were sewn up in pillows embroidered by my gram before her stroke like bodies about to be slid to sea beneath the blessing of the flag; or they were hung in curtains, still as dust; concealed in the patterns of the wallpaper, the pulls of lamps; laid down like life is sometimes given up in chests, in spreads, in tablecloths, in towels, in handkerchiefs, in ties, in rugs or 1 failed to see
      how my aunt had stacked our closets full of paper, lunch, and undies, just as I took no note of the sticky humid walls, the crabby furniture, the dirt, or how my father crippled himself with overwork as surely as if he’d fallen from a ladder, which is to say his greed killed him (he was laying up treasure to retire on, but beauty fadeth like a flower—the future does that), even though I knew 1 must look like a banana through those yellow lenses flaring like sodium lamps. Did they enlarge me? I unkinked slowly like a flooding hose. 1 was a watcher in a world of windows but 1 spent my time not seeing what 1 saw, as when, on Sunday drives, we drove past the pickaninnies or the gray shacks which sheltered the Poles from the fall of the factory chimneys, and I sang hit songs in the backseat, or ran like candidates for office the number of cola signs
           I could count against the number I could find selling beer, and Ruth, her small mouth in an O like a towel holder, Rue did the same thing, I’m sure, when, for instance, I lipsticked her lips-—O Master Hobbes, good Tom, my teacher, what delicious powers, what sweet will was willing me be sovereign when my phallus was the whole state!—and she gazed at me through those narrow blue panes she wore to be swish, or the wide round rosy ones (such a collection of stained glass she had—more than Rheims, more than Bruges, more than Angers, more than Chartres—at least more than the Third Street Episcopal Church where she communed the Sundays she wasn’t kneeling between my knees to sniff my dick like a dog and spaniel her spirit toward her deity through glaring chartreuse shades, the color of sick grass, both paws already at my zipper with her wishes and her begs): teach me, tell me what to do. Teach me. Tell me what to take.
                              A handsome young comer from Hellas believed he could bugger as well as the gentlemen who now gave him the screw, which—If true— would lift him above all his fellas.
               Culp plays at Indian. He makes fire by rubbing together two sticks. His fingers cross in the shame sign. Shuzz a shuzz. Smoke rises like a band saw. Yes. Heat rises. Suns rise. They do. Moons too. What sound does the moon make when its pale face appears above a Greek sea in the late afternoon? Culp cannot communicate without rhyme. He is an authority on Buck Rogers. Tell you what to take? my dear dumpling, what would please you? The subject of the sem this sem is the Balkans. Excuse me: that’s Bulgaria, Admiral Horthy, Madame Lupescu. Be happy to: from the fall of the Hapsburgs to the rise of Marshal Tito, including the baking of Bela Kun, with a short digression on the ferocity, the treachery, of the Swedes. Who knows, sandcastle? but you might consider whether fellatio, handbags, and Ploesti interest you. Now class: what other sounds does my colleague Culp make? he makes the sound of a stone falling in dry silence between the moist walls of an ancient well, a well dug to withstand sieges. See how carefully the stones were wedged in the walls by workmen down so far they finally sent the blind. He likes to say he’s noisy as a moistened stamp. He makes sounds to show how the mind turns over. We had a well in my grandfather’s house, and eventually an electric pump was put in the basement. Hitler’s bunker had batteries. Grandfather tunneled his way to water like a prisoner of war. But in the end the water soured. Beneath the ground
      there are many rivers. Some are huge. Ants live in cities there. The mole moves in secret, and the worm. Culp formulates his laws in limerick the way some people use calculus. A few wasps and spiders make their homes in a hole like the prairie dog does, the rattlesnake, bathwater, or the rat. Culp grew up during the early days of radio the way other people grew up through the depths of the Depression. He makes the sound of eyelids rapping up like shades. Listen, he says: soft soap. We listen. Lights like ideas go snick in his head, hopes abruptly unrubber. I should like to come like sap—that simply—the wet without the dream ... the way perfume is released or like the bubbler in the park. What’s this, he wants to know: he is the burglar’s tread. We listen. And this? 1 hear the chewing of a nail. I hear bladders collecting piss. I hear nerves gathering revolutionary strength like air raid sirens or a fear of heights. They build catch basins in the Algarve too—and along the Costa del Sol. Portugal is a poor country. It has to beg. I’ve seen a stone wall flowered like a casket. Bees honeycomb in stone walls and in trees. Stone walls keep the cows out and can be cunningly made. Spiders sometimes burrow in dry ground like rabbits. The wind rushes like an ocean over Indiana. Swallows bore into an orange cliff, which perhaps floats ahead of its reflection in the sea. Do you know any doors which aren’t traps? Answer me! The sun rises like the pennies we roasted when we were kids. Or we placed them on the tracks to be flattened by trains. Why can’t the sun come up silver some morning like the moon? Or silver some night, pale as a piece of parchment. What’s this? the ash of a paper match. My wife makes charts of her ancestry. I know many bodies worse than jails.
                               Suppose a mad god in a fuss went round the world on a bus, and for each kiss he blew, he ran over two;
                           what good would ensue? Please discuss. I I
        I like to pretend that the world is on its side and that I’m climbing the street with my eyes as I would a steep wall, a tower (here’s one handhold—careful— there’s another), and, indeed, at the end of the street like a hat on a stick is the sky, pale as milk, thin as hosiery. Yes, when the world’s on edge, streets rise. And I’m carrying coiled over my shoulder as I climb a rope made of twisted limbs and bedsheets I shall use to descend by on the other side. You can tip a room that way, exchange ceiling and floor, and I’ve struck postures making love—as fat as I am—which did the same. Please, how did they accomplish these inversions? they manipulated contexts, reframed the vision, altered expectations, gave you a new perspective like a frog in a bottle or pig in a furnace;
             they created sudden strangeness, made you a Martian. For example? tents, telescopes, towers and the tops of mountains, travel. Some encircle you like the knothole, or slat your field of vision the way your fingers do when you peer between them, or web it more wonderfully than the spider, as when you make lewd eyeway through the furze between your woman’s legs. Make your citations more concrete. Well, age, for instance, illness, money, color, or a change of clothes . . . chemicals, I suppose, Dada, hidden mirrors, the coastline from the sea or a riverbank from a raft, the right line of poetry. Skydiving, I imagine, alters your outlook remarkably. Hand- and headstands do, the Loop-o-plane and self-pretzelation. For example? Rue’s face as I glimpsed it dimly through the drench of her hair, approaching me like the grille of an oncoming car. The sidewalks often burned my bare feet, and the air where it struck the hot street wriggled as it rose like frying worms. Black tar bubbled between the joints of cement as though the earth underneath were a furnace, and we would scoop out a bit of the lavalike inside with a stick and chew it sagely when it cooled like ballplayers their tobacco.
                I’m having a horrible time. Under her hair, behind her glasses, beneath her raincoat . . . chewed nails, sockless feet, scuffed shoes, bleached jeans . . . Then: just tell me what you want me to do and I'll do it.
                I want to chew you up like celery, she writes, but really she’s a creature made of glass through which my prick will burn like a blue light, and with the same effect, passing like the palest shadow across her life, no more than a sperm stain on a towel. I bribe her with ice cream. I promise to bite her breasts. She insults me. You talk like a treaty. I do not. You talk like some book you’ve reviewed. I do not. She plays bitsy-baby. The lengths she makes me go to are a measure of my need. It is absurd. She pretends to a passion for rocks, for ferns, for streams. I discover that she knows nothing about nature, comes from Gary, has lived most of her life amid smoke and steam. She thinks she’ll become a convert to Catholicism and studies nunning the way I might donkey baseball. I compose several paradoxical epigrams for her on the subject of guilt and innocence. She loves the condition of innocence, which she happily confuses with ineptitude. She loves riddles, too, when she gets to pose them, but other puzzles frighten her, and she pushes my hand away. What do poppies in a meadow make you think of? Well, my subjugation was complete. Who could have been more unguarded than I? did I not prance in the sun? play pat-a-cake, beg and pursue, give comfort, and contrive to open my pants like the door of a pantry? Did I not give her, finally, some of my best spasms? risk my reputation? ruin a suit? The price you have to pay your slaves is everywhere on the rise. She liked to sit by my river and quietly watch the reflection of her glasses crinkle. She hated my seed on her hands, but she didn’t mind mud. She would stick
      lumps of it on her nipples. Look at naughty Rue. She quotes Kahlil Gibran in a dreamy voice and claims that if I'm not nice to her she'll let herself be gang-buggered. Once I came for her in a paper cup and she saved it till the bottom browned and yellowed. She was delighted. As brown as a banana, as brown and as yellow, she chanted, embarrassing me, and I persuaded her to float it away as a gift to the river, its blooms like bored passengers staring down at the water. Poppies? They make me think of Flanders, I said finally, and all the poor boys who fell there during the Great War, and of the poet who wrote— You're nothing but a fat shit, she says. 1 smile. I realize that if I let her insult me, she’ll let me feel her. Poppies in a meadow make me think a bleeding animal as large as a cloud has crossed it, she says, pleased with the idea. She claims to be afraid of God, but 1 don’t believe her. 1 taught her to roll back my foreskin with her tongue, and when 1 would writhe, she would stop to ask me if it hurt, because she constantly confused my pleasure with her pain. I'm having a horrible time. She searched through her soul like a capuchin seeking fleas. Did I want to be born a boy? is that my trouble? I see nothing sick about wanting my cock sucked, I am driven to shout, and I wonder if our leaders have troubles of the same kind, occasions when the truth is driven out of them with a great oooouff, as Culp would put it, like a boot drives wind from the belly, and I used to get a cramp in the middle of Martha, the ball of my right foot in as much pain as if I’d stepped on a nail. She worried a lot about herself, but I loved her miserable and mixed up, dependent and arrogant, sly and naive. I minded it not at all when her tears, snot, and saliva wet my privates. Ruth writes me that my penis is a purple tower, and I have to think that, no, only the end of my penis is ever purple; but, nevertheless, yes, my penis is a purple tower. During exams she would bite her fingers till they bled, bloodstreams crossing on her wrists like bangles. She wept by letting her nose run. Her laughter, on the other hand, was light, clear, sane, gay. It gave me a chill. Gee, if I told my daddy about you and me, about what we've just done, he d shit his guts in a pail.
         1 appreciate that answer. Thank you.
         My students are in their places, waiting, like floats for a parade, but only I shall move, all other movement will be their illusion. I shall move less like a trapped rat, though, and more like a catboat tacking against the wind, my white shirt a sail bellied by my belly. 1 shall be measured, stately, and ensure that at least a modicum of attention is paid to me and my subject by saying, 1 want you to write essays on this. Yes . . .
         I want you to write essays on this, using only stamped official paper, and keeping carefully to the ruled lines, substantiating your absurd views with footnotes citing unimpeachable authorities—Castro, Che, Mao, Marx, Mein Kam-pf, Madame Blavatsky, Carmen Miranda, Hamlin Garland, Dr. Scholl—
            and placing your name, in your own hand, in blue or black ink, at the top of each page, since there has been of late much cheating . . . such standards as we have, have gone down in a sea of deceit, laziness—lassitude, at least—laziness, I believe—my god, yes, sheer sloth, I’m sure of it—accidie—has infected the student body like some venereal disease—crabs, clap, scabies—indolence never itches, does it? idleness turns nobody's balls blue: well, all quality has been quite lost—ambition, pride . . . like dirty water down a drain. Everything’s declined but costs. Yes. Thought too . . . thought, masterless, is now allowed to romp or ramble idly, like a dog on walks, to piss on any post, bush, tree it pleases; while passion, for its part, plays everywhere unheeding, as innocent of its danger as a toddler in a train yard; even language has been emptied of its sense and burned like a building, while in its place . . . oh, your movies, let me tell you, put nothing together . . . these—these pale-faced photos . . . grasping them is like squeezing a handful of raisins . . .
               The coffee drunk during committee meetings comes in two kinds of containers. Yes or No? Answer at once. But take your time.
               Look. Light is breaking on the floor like glass. Your wife is swimming in her flesh like soup. My spirits rise. They can. They do. How much of my life have I spent at long tables talking, crushing out cigarettes as I should like to crush my colleagues’ arguments, folding dittos into fans after doodling on their margins, and calling my activities . . . what? . . . education.
               Eloquence, so noble once, has been silenced by shouting, while the anger of the angry, deprived of dignity and shortly after that of any righteousness it might possess, runs naked and ugly through the streets. (And no one will know Latin anymore.)
               Speak up, class: what is the answer? The principles of historical inevitability are not applicable to Arkansas.
               Ah, the age is callous, the fifties flat as a plank the past, like a pirate, makes us walk, and now the end is on us. The sixties see us drop. The seventies—will they swallow us like the sun? the eighties eat up any who remain? the nineties cough us up on some deserted beach? well, time is tough, it doesn't care what it must ingest; nor shall I complain when my feet are wet by the water, and the worst the world has to offer climbs me like a slime—far faster than I age—as long as I can see you all bum-up in brine ahead of me, for I, your teacher—yes— am callous too, at dirty work an old hand, and I have seen better. . . much; there was a day when the finest was not too fine to shake a sieve for, the highest not too high to mount an expedition peaked for flagging it, or a lovely thing, with love, not too lovely to labor toward; and I have seen it—seen such lovers, climbers, miners—I lived then, when we had stronger jaws and sounder teeth, when our culture wasn’t something to be sucked on like a sugar tit, or like a lolly,
       licked—no—it struck us blows, indeed it did, it gave us stripes; but now the worthwhile is the same jig as the easy; excellence is thought as common as fingers—most everyone has ten of them, our training is as broken down and rusty as our trains in whose decaying and abandoned yards, like cars, the good is being coupled with the cheap, the loud and violent with the profound, the lasting with the noisy flap and flutter of the nonce ... for what can you do with the present but live in it?—a brief and trivial pastime—and 1 fancy not a single figure in the whole of history who was worthy of its mention kept his eyes so laced in his shoes when he walked as you students do—no—he looked before him and behind; he did not let the shallow present, like a tissue-covered box, tease him into being but a tinseled ribbon or a Christmas sticker on the time . . .
         At home you are the one who has to clean the toilet bowl. True or False?
         Look. Light is littering the floor like trash. Your wife’s vagina opens and then shuts like a night-blooming plant. Oh so many yawning eyes—can I continue? 1 turn my back and their figures shut with a brave and puny snap like short books. Tempers. What? rise. They can. They do. Those small assignments I’m asking for—well, I want them placed on my desk in neat piles. Every essay is to bear upon its cover (a tinted plastic folder purchased for this purpose) your name, my name, the name of this course, its number, place and hour of meeting, day’s date, and finally the title you've chosen for your little endeavor, since there has been of late much cheating . . . much . . .
         I can remember when butter was twenty-five cents a pound, eggs the same a dozen, and cigarettes a dime. Gasoline was . . . fifteen the gallon. Yes. Well, things go up. Yes. Building costs, mortgage money, even washtubs and that yellow laundry soap, soft and crumbly like a gum eraser.
         Pupils. Poor pale dutiful donkeys ... I think of them as docile animals, indeed, as drones, as slaves, emaciated refugees and patients, as spirits of the dead. Their greed, the way they fall on everything material, has made them insubstantial as the blood of Christ.
         Cocks rise. Sometimes . . . yes. Sometimes. The gorge rises. That’s right. Yes. Rivers deepen gorges. The people. What? rise. They rise. The people rise.
         No, they cling to objects—their dresses, pencil boxes, bikes—as though they had no true solidity themselves, and would, without this heaviness they hold to, be otherwise unballasted and blown away. Poor sweet wraiths . . . scarcely born and they’ve gone into ghosting already . . . how well it must pay. My ruler passes through their knuckles when I rap them as though their bodies were fragile colonies of dust adrift in the light. No. The only thing alive in them is their anxiety—a hot wire lingering in a cooling tube. Ordered by the alphabet, they sit in rows in front of me, fold their faces like praying hands, recite when requested, calculate upon command. It should satisfy me. They’re
          little trouble. And the few who dare me, who defy my rule, 1 discipline with a ferocity which always surprises me, although it never surprises them. I have shaken this little swine sometimes until my arms ache; my voice has gone lame in the service of shouting; I’ve snapped pencils like beans and rapped my knuckles raw with rage; I've quite dulled my wit (once such a shining blade I thought I d drawn it, like a king, from stone), and 1 have worn my irony until its threads show. Why? where, all this time, has my heart been? in my job? a chintzy chest to tick in. Fill the blanks. I used to have a potty pot with bunnies on it. My mother leaked before she broke. How much of me lies dry above her? The Germans hung young German gunners, like Christmas baubles, from the Strasse trees. Schoolboys, I warn you they were, and while the Russians were grinding German earth between their teeth, these feeble weewees were absent an hour from their posts without leave, proudly parading before their parents in their new soldier uniforms. Every tree in the Hindenburg Allee was used as a gibbet. Yes, well, every year they do seem younger, and I sometimes think I treat them as if the whole world were on rewind and they were flowing back upstream like film. At this rate I shall be conducting kindergartens soon, piling up blocks, and leading my kids in tunes composed for the kazoo. It is, I think, the wars. Our soldiers have run down to children now, and so we give them and their killing clubs ferocious scoutlike names—the Werewolves, Wasps, the Death's Heads, Screaming Eagles, Kinks, and so on—-and arm them with penknives, razors, bottles of gasoline, a few bricks, bats, catapults and slings, to battle the enemy through the streets and die like their older brothers did in Stalingrad, Corcyra, Carthage, or Berlin—fighting to the last pupil for the party. It was grand, the manner of their dying. Loyal and fierce, they rushed at Visigoth and Mongol, Moor and Jew—finally at one another— as certain in their faith as those who storm their way up Michigan to fly their flag from General Motors. Yes. Younger. . . yearly. I might as well have tightened bolts on Chevrolets, for these kids passed me in the same inexorable, belt-endless way, and I screwed them down fast to their frames . . . that was my function, and I can say, now I’ve fifty years in life and twenty-five in service, that I did not funk it. I cranked up my enthusiasm every morning like a cold car, and drove at them sounding my horn—threatening, cajoling, exhorting— all for their sakes. 1 dripped sarcasm on them like hot wax until my stubbed tongue began to gutter. I cannot light it even in the shelter of my head now. Still, they know what they want; they like to set records; they want high marks; the bear’s bragging clawscratch on the trunks of trees, ball scores, dash times, birthrates, flood lines, casualties, collisions; they want everything to grow like companies, go up like buildings, increase like savings—the voice, the bust, the ownership of land—to swell, augment, enlarge, expand—and it is true that all around them, as if they’d caught a cyclone in a sack, the whole works rises.
         ! could keep my class in line—and not have to lift a finger, raise my voice, form a frown—merely by promising to turn them over to Odilo Globocmk, to have an Emtefest at their expense, except that they would never recognize this comical name, this deceitful noun, and it would therefore be beyond their terror, even after I had spent several sessions extolling the German gift for euphemism.
         All right. All right. All right. Occasionally . . . nowadays . . . I've had to mow through a few bad patches, students storming around, crying out like cuckoos, as self-righteous as the pope, and pissed on pot. Normally, never. It’s not the norm to carry placards into the classroom, to march about the place like kids practicing kindergarten, to raise a voice above the level of the dutiful. No. Normally I can glare at some smarty so successfully his ass burns. 1 know the real meaning of these rebellions. But times turn. They will turn again.
         [ never say so in so many words—scarcely anyone does—but if we spoke emotion's language openly—honest as erections are—if we felt above a whisper even, then the child whose doll is broken would demand destruction for the world; and what exquisite pleasure it would be to purge it, totally, of parents, for example . . . the whole simpering tribe of aunts made into gristle like the gypsies; uncles pitchforked under freshly turned sod like dead plants to fertilize the earth and fright the worms; then the ugly and the old, the lame, the halt, the blind, the black, in a twinkling, to tuck them in a corner of oblivion with a wish ... a mere wish (the thought makes me salivate as though I were already chewing); the sick, too, and the lackadaisical, the dirty and the poor, the mad, to plant in ditches like spring bulbs, to burn in bundles like Guy Fawkes in celebration of the Fifth or Fourteenth or the Fourth, to gun down the proud—tat tat tat—the snobby and the drunk, the drugged, the rich, set lice upon the smiling and the oh-so-self-assured—to quite do in—kids, cats, kingdoms, Charles Clarence Culp—anything you fancied—caravans and trailers, noisy motorbikes—entire professions (lawyers always a popular choice)— every opposition and annoyance—to roll out thin as dough, to flatten—smash! to cut to pieces like a pie, to blow apart, to slash as with a quirt or saber, to crush like paper, to consume as easily as beer, and lightly—pouf—to cause to vanish, fade like colors in the sun or pressure of a kiss . . . against a wall, to piss away ... to piss away their spirits. Dance on their graves, you say? why, by heaven, Eichmann, make them big as ballrooms. There the fox will trot, crow preen, and dog deserve his day.
         Here is a puzzle for you, pupils: when the Germans went through Georgia they drove nails into the nipples of the women; they spitted babies on their bayonets as if they'd been reading Dostoevski; they fried the private organs of the males in oil; like braves, they festooned their gun belts with pubic hair they'd peeled from the mons in decorative strips. Consequently we can com-
           prehend in what a blaze of rage, with what hungry relish, the Soviet peasants paid them back that savagery, and raped the Reich with a dagger, plundering repeatedly for their revenge. Listen now—attend—for now the conundrum comes: what horrors had been done the Germans first that they should prove the monsters that they proved? was it living among Lutherans so long a time that did it? had their souls been seared by the Roman cross? were they prated at by prelates till their wits went? was it that scuffy struggle to find foot-and-feeling room in father-filled houses? We read how Mongolians, too, for wrist-watches which they greatly wondered at and greatly prized—overeager, sometimes hasty—severed such ticking wrists from the arms which bore them; but that, as well, we understand in terms of their vast distance from all centers of real breeding, their low level of life, their yellowness, their horse-and-cattle culture, the severe climate and the suffering which was so common to their country, the injuries the Germans had repeatedly done them during the war; but what was love like in Ltibeck that it required corpses? what deprivations of soul and substance had the poor Boche undergone in Bonn, Berlin, and Munich, in Stuttgart and Dresden, that they should be so savage to the savages? Was it love like love is, say, in Logansport or Lansing? Yet really weren’t they white men playing Indians? dudes dressed sheepishly in the uniforms of the Old West? Wild Bills and Buffalo Codys, banging away at dumb shaggy beasts, and skinning the country? Write on that, and wonder while you’re writing whether, of the dishonors done him—and consequently of the wrongs which need righting—each man is not the measure; and if he is patient—and why should he not be patient?—since, for the present, he is impotent; he cannot get it up for his own hand; he can afford no more than the rags of resignation, and must hang his fancy innards on a hook before he dares go out—but if each man is patient—and why should he not be patient?—the time may turn itself about, face usefully toward him; produce, perhaps, a new leader who will remove all old impediments to action, and release his rage like a lion, let malice slither from its basket, spit spite like a cobra. So there may come a peerless prince, and he may yet arrange it that one day a man’s enemy (and who is not one—friend and enemy—when the world itself is?) ... ah, an enemy! will be pegged out before him, naked for the knife; and then, by god, who will not cut, and cackle at the cutting?
              Just tell me what you want me to do, and I’ll do it.
              O for a girl who’d let her cunt flourish as vulgarly as one of my prize weeds, so sun-self-centered her interior tans, because my weeds reached freely toward their weedy beauty without shame or excuse. The tall wild grasses which bent their stems like Caiders to suspend their seeds, and moved like mobiles, too, as tender to the air as a fresh web: they needed no one to accept them; by chance they’d been given a chance to be, and now they were, without embar-
       rassment or apology. They were no longer weeds. Just as I suspect that mass bombing and indiscriminate destruction, like the purging of parties and the purification of programs, eliminate undesirable crowding and provide for a sluggish economy a much needed stimulus. Japan, for instance, or Germany after the war . . . the flowering of Israel upon the pruning of the Jews—don’t you see? Cities are regularly improved by being burned down (often in no other way); some have been cindered entirely to everybody’s profit. Others, Carthaged from the world, like last week's worries, are never replaced and never missed. Yes. Not banned—no longer hunted down like thieves or herded into vacant lots like niggers into ghettos—my weeds had been abandoned to themselves—who better?—and with nothing but empty level sand around them then, they rose as roughly as Australians to their full height ... an en-telechia like the sea’s surf . . .
         Exactly. For what young lady who through some fluke has skipped her culture the way a schoolgirl cuts her classes or a novice escapes from a nunnery . . . what young lady, free of both Freud and the feel-ups of the family, a maid whose cunt is consequently uncontaminated by any concept, who takes her pleasure straight, without the fizz of religion or the olive of philosophy . . . what young lady lucky in this way is likely to hold out her hand, however witlessly relaxed her head is, to a Germanically fat, fifty-year-old professor of history who suggests that after class, and his penultimate lecture on Adolf Hitler, sure to be of interest—since it’s such a nice day—they both have a try at going to the river?
         My name is William Frederick Kohler. There is nothing genuinely German about me. I wash my face with the paw-sides of a cat, the forelegs of a fly. Right
       or Wrong. Hope to die. I overweigh____pounds. I was born in Grand, Iowa,
       in 19_, which means that I am now not quite___. I live alone. Honest or Dis-
       honest. Cross my palm. True or False. Yes and No. Culp makes the un of an unhappy man. 1 believe in air raids and the mass murder of innocent civilians. T. F. The correct answer is stylus. When I was a child 1 cried a lot, as a youth I sulked, as a married man I ... 1 took an interest in gardening and long walks; I kept a scrapbook which was entirely about Napoleon; 1 taught my children to roll hoops as little French boys do, and I explained to them why there were no more ponds to sail boats on now that kings were gone and kingdoms pooped; I gave up pinochle, passion, painting, and poetry; I was no longer alone; and when my wife wanted assistance in the nursery or the laundry or the kitchen, I came to her aid; I . . . made myself useful; 1 . . . helped out; I . . . was never myself; no, I was not, no, I . . . lectured at many different colleges and universities; I . . . wrote books, articles, reviews, memos, notes; I . . . supervised dissertations; I . . . attended conferences, received grants, gave grades; I ... sat on boards, 1 membered committees, I composed curriculums, I gave advice, I
             filed reports, assigned seats, paid taxes, bought license plates; 1 numbered rooms, names, courses, credits, days; I . . . what? I mourned. I raged.
               You were well paid. Well, think of what it means in this life to be out-ofpocket. Better to have a hole in your heart. Did Iago not direct us to put money in our purse? and are you not cold come evening sometimes in the companionship and holding of your wife? feed her cunt with quarters, she will give you heat; she’ll warm you like leftovers till you steam. The only loneliness, the only emptiness, is that of the pocket, the only failure is to be without coins for the machines.
               What else do you teach? Culp makes the sound of something vending. The folly of family ties. The ceaseless, subtle chafe of close friends. The poison in partnerships. The iron grasp of groups. The imprisoning hug of the hometown.
               Have you any further message for us at this time? I should like to tell the people, in those rows there—the scratch-assed ones, who sit as though their buttocks were a pair of self-congratulating hands—those rows of wives and workers—farmers, students . . . Who has set some tuning fork to singing in their holes, 1 wonder . . . ? I should like to tell this race of giants they’re but little men where life’s lived. Oh they’re as large as all outdoors, 1 know, and as pink from the sun as Texas grapefruit, but the indoor world is different . . . dark, dangerous, demanding. And there? they’re thin enough to live inside a pinch. Take care. In Arezzo once, the Florentines, who’d sacked the town themselves and fucked the boys, had burning brands snuffed up them in reply, a fitting answer, it was thought, to sodomites. Note it well. Take care. Everyone will soon belong to the PdP—the Party of the Disappointed People.
               For what, young lady, was I saying . . . ? No. You were arranging for us what you’d learned—a distillation of your studies. Ah. What you want is a wad-up of wisdom. Well. I learned that if I could be an emperor like the caesar of the Romans or a czar of all the Russias, I would regularly execute every other one of my loyal followers; I would keep my mind and heart clear as a mirror, reflecting without reach or risk; I would cut a swath around me and call it my capital, and in the stalls of johns in smelly seaport towns, I’d be satisfied to get my sex from sailors.
               Martha’s eyes are like eagles; they carry off blackbirds; her lashes are like the wing-ends of hawks, delicately fingering their float; her hair is long, blond, and skewered like a capon plucked for roasting; her breasts are like pillows which threaten to smother me, and her flesh comes into view in starts and fits the way the frames of the arcade’s penny peep machine march jerkily in front of my imagination. I had one cousin who would let me look at her naked no-no (what a campaign that was!), but the looks she longed for were continuous. 1 was to be in a kind of permanent dazzle, as she was to be bright sun off water: 1 would
       blink and blink and never see a thing. No, these are like the glimpse I once had of my mother when 1 innocently opened a door on her dressing. Do you know any doors which aren't dangerous? Answer in full. That’s fully. And her breasts were like pillows? no; they were a pair of white handleless handbags, they were spread on her chest like a thick spill on a counter; they were runny as icing. It was my first intimation that beauty leaked away like water. Gather ye rosebuds, the poet said, but there was nothing I could do about it. The seasons passed with my hand still clinging to my prick like last year’s resolution not to. Even now the wind blows butternut twigs against our bedroom window—crick.et— crick.et—just the way 1 turn the crank on Culp and make a bloomered girl move spastically into view. Martha? I ask her what she's up to. Her thighs are stacks of folded towels; her bum is like two boulders kissing on the beach, bleached and scoured by salt and sun; her crack is as deep as a furnace, and so difficult to wipe she sends spelunkers down with lamps like miners. 1 am digging a well—a deep one—for sieges—with walls like Byzantine mosaics: ah, how the colors would glow, the forms amaze, could we but see them! Will there be animals on them, as at Altamira? No. There will be thoughts, set down in the shapes of animals sometimes, as in St. Augustine. I still interrogate myself, study guilt and innocence in Hitler’s Germany, though Martha stands outside my study door like a sentinel—l hear her breathing—her silence like a glass held to the wall, her will a rifle; but 1 know her habits, I have timed her movements, there is no tick of hers for which I can’t predict the tock; and she is listening for my thoughts; she does not love me, but she would love to know me; she wonders what I’m up to in here; she no longer believes i am working on my book; she knows that I vanish, perhaps she even knows I go off to the river, or that I commit lone adulteries in the attic, multiple atrocities in the study, singular abominations in the basement. I shall get even—that’s what I am thinking while 1 scratch away in here. O so many insults to the soul, so many . . . how many days did she make me drive a baby buggy? I shall get even . . I’ll get so even I’ll be ahead. Even if everything is lost, nought against nought is even; for the thing to remember when the ghetto has risen and the rising has been repressed—buildings bombed, burned, and bulldozed—and no one is alive to remember the Fiihrer like a bunny in his bunker, is . . . yes, what? to remember that the ghetto rose; when all are roasted—black as dead blood and blue as niggers—remember that the ghetto rose, it rose. Warsaw rose, and the slaves of the Romans. What shall we study, children? stamens and pistils? prisons? . . . history. Christ rose. That’s been frequently alleged. Though torn to pieces, the head of Orpheus sang its way down Hebrus to the sea. Osiris was sewn together like a coat. The incidence of suicide is up, and gonorrhea. Prices? pitch? yes. Usury. The Helots and the Communards were
           both cut down. Huguenots nightly. Armenians in numbers, though insufficiently. How many millions have been murdered since X? how many cities Dresdened? countrysides Chryslered? The market rises. Carthage was harvested, and Melos threshed like grain. The trade unions overflow. Shanghai, Chicago, Calcutta: crowds like clogged drains. A blush is arising. And 1—Missouri—1 shall—what shall I? I, poor clerk, sad scrivener, deep dreamer, lamenter of the lost... 1 shall dream ... I shall lament ... 1 shall dream of bodies floating down a river like a run of logs, so many there are jams. I have dreadful dreams in which I’m circumcised with a pair of scissors. And men in track shoes, holding poles with which you open out-of-reach windows, balance there for prizes. Along the bank there’s cheering thick as trees, and waving wild as brambles. I’ve had a dream in which my hairs, like Culp’s, were wires, the paper-covered kind you twist. The crows grew so heavy they couldn't rise. And 1, cataloguer for the company, compiler of lists of the maimed, the dead, the Nile floods annually like the Wabash, the Mekong, and the Yangtze ... I, simple functionary, I compose my river-water music, outguess Dionysus, conserve my hate in jars like jelly, lie patient, quiet, unassuming, like a cat in grass, while others raise their sights . . . Sleepers rise. Nightmares occupy the cities, thousands are left heartless, the rest wear their rescue like a badge.
                               Red, black, pink, tan, brown, or blue: whose political thug are you?
           I—Mahoning, professor of historical prose and Greek geometry, the Rhone, the Rhine, the Danube, Ganges . . . 1—Miami, Midas, Tippecanoe . . . Cromwell to my children ... I, Frederick, Charles the Five ... I, vive le roi, instructor in the milking of pricks, the erections of dogs and donkeys . . . the Meuse, the Merderet ... of reducing to dust and other casual smithereening, the Cumberland, the Rapidan, the Seine . . . rubbling and rendering in general, including Jews, the Volga, 1 . . . what? I—Ohio ... I rise. The cost . . . the Mississippi, the price of everything . . . what? rises.
              1 appreciate that answer. Thank you.
                 Do Rivers
                                  She preferred me to begin at the base of her neck. I preferred to begin a bit higher up, on the shoreline of her hair. With my right forefinger slanted slightly
       to bring the nail into play, I would inscribe the course of a river—so gently, so slowly, it might have been a tear's trail—running its convoluted way the length of Lou s back, semicircling a buttock, and concluding in her crack, at a fulfillment one might call a delta.
          Do rivers. That was the command. She would be lying only somewhat on her side. Do rivers meant she was happy, but wanted, now, to sleep. I would have to unspoon myself in order to obey, allow some space for the play of my arm. Then I’d trace the meandering of a little stream, or the sluggish flow of a broad expanse of water, depending on whether 1 was using the edge of a nail or the ball of my finger. Water, in our world, did not simply flow downhill, however. Rivers rose over shoulder blades; they turned up the slope of a buttock; they slid sideways, rippling over ribs, or subsided toward the small of the back as a raindrop does to create a puddle. Hydraulics didn’t matter; only the shape of the line, the speed of its passage, and the feel of the riverbed on Lou’s back made a difference to her, while I kept my mind on the meaning of its motion, because each river inscribed a message, at least in the beginning, when river-ing was the summation of us—was what our love was—just as the expression “going to the river" meant making out, particularly canoodling out-of-doors, in a private corner of a park, or on a secluded sandbar, preferably one with handsome overhanging trees.
          In the beginning, when 1 invented rivers, there was often a soft light left in the room, and in that lessening illumination I would study Lou’s back the way, I imagine, all lovers do, first following with my eye the articulation of its slopes and curves, the ridges where the bones were, the long lines the muscles drew when they were gently flexed or gradually relieved, inching over fields of fine warm skin—pale here, rosy there, as if a day, not merely my look, were quietly passing over it—or (according to the Culp in me) the way syrup oozes over a stack of jacks . . . (from the point of view of my nemesis, Planmantee, however), at a rate more rapid than my mind really wanted to believe . . . although (in Governali’s, perhaps grander, terms) 1 was wholly absorbed, as a liquid by a blotter . . . while (from Herschel’s steadier standpoint) my gaze was rounder, like a pool of light, and never a line which could be read as a river. . . well, I say (on behalf of a more Kohlerish condition), my look, my lips, my longings, as well as my illusions, lingered the way, in summer, cattle graze in rich grass, out of their minds with meditation, languidly, as someone already full sucks on a malt, the choc dark in a straw which is standing straight up in its froth of thick milk . . . and finally, then, putting a fingertip where my scrutiny was, to touch an especially enticing spot, put a line to, and trace, the caress of my gaze so that Lou could also follow it, as if my eye now had added to its watchfulness its own warm breath, traveling in love along her body—a body so beautiful I
            could not believe that I was being provided its pleasures. Hence a river— which is what I later called it—was the same as (a) the passage of my delight down the backside of her beauty, (b) the typical stupefaction of a first-timer, (c) the indulgence of my voyeuristic tendencies, (d) the reenactment of a fundamental human gesture, (e) a common expression of sexual infatuation, (f) the inscription on its object, like a laudatory epigraph, of a longing look.
               The sheets creased my back in a different sort of way. I could feel where the folds had been forced into my side and shoulder. They would fade, but the rivers I mapped out for Lou scarcely left a mark except when a fine white line remained for a moment in a bit of tan, erased by her resilient skin as rapidly as made. I was hoping, though, to transmit, through the moving touch of my fingertip, a feeling for her form which would include and shape her spirit. Lou had been, after all, a shopgirl to begin with, a part-time student with loose long hair and great natural beauty but no particular polish. Her father worked in a mill, her mother sewed special institutional uniforms and did a little tailoring at her home. In my infatuation, 1 foresaw a shining future for her. I would help her out of her clothes and into my bed, indeed, but she would be held there in the arms of a higher culture, and would naturally absorb some of its substance. I was not being purely patronizing, for if my mind used my eyes to wax her body, what 1 immediately desired was not what I eventually received; what she yielded to me endangered my brain’s customarily cynical and sardonic—I would prefer to believe, frank and honest—ideas; because my views altered as I watched her, were revised as 1 meandered my no longer merely lustful touch toward the bliss of her behind, so that by the time I flattened my hand and fanned my fingers, maybe to imagine that their shape made a delta, 1 had only sentimental hungers and valentine verse—that is to say, love—to express when the river reached waist and began to cross a buttock. The men of Columbus, no less than 1, feared to fall off the edge of the earth. And here, in a soft slow roll of flesh beneath my fingers, was the end, the sweet threatening edge of everything.
               1 was not to play Pygmalion, of course, past its opening curtain. Had I done so—such is my skill—Lou would have been turned to statue, instead of the other way. That metamorphic flip-flop (1 possess no thought not daunted by its own daring, no feeling not petrified by the sight of its secret face) 1 managed with Martha. Yes, with my wife I went from hey to nonny in no time. My fall from her flesh would mock the fall of man by commencing with carnal knowledge and ending in ignorance. However, Lou would leave me with the same insouciance with which she joined me, unsullied, certainly, by my superiority, unimproved by my passion, amused but not moved by my jokes. It was 1 who was supposed to be having an adventure, but it was she who had it.
          So I cannot believe, now, what 1 believed then, that my rivers were reaching her soul somewhere; were, like the rivers of Eden, those waters of the spirit which made the garden grow, even the tree whose fruit enclosed, like pips, the calories of good and evil, and which would water the four corners of her earth. It was rather, for Lou, a kind of hind-end hypnosis, and after half a dozen streams had done their baroque turns and bottomed out, she would be asleep.
       1 would continue rivering anyhow, as if my finger were writing a reverie; on the other hand, she would start to stir if I began to draw, if my caresses became ideational, formed the figures of geometry, might be construed as roads on maps, or were interrupted in any way, dotted, stitched, or if their descent intermittently dawdled and dashed, if my lines got tangled, if they were indicative of anything other than water presumably seeking its level and lollying along to the sea.
          In the beginning, too, I gave them names: the Wabash, naturally, for being nearby, or I whispered Illinois in her ear as my nail slipped from the border of her hair like a refugee, Kankakee and Erie sometimes, Platte, Maumee, an Ohio occasionally, Niagara or Missouri; and, at first, as well, I tried to individuate the journeys, the Erie taking an eastward course, the Mississippi controlling the middle like a bully, and others, Rios, drifting down to the sheet, to the point of impress, the only border. Eventually, the whisper went unwhisped, names were neither found nor imagined, difference disappeared, meaning too, and the gesture became routine. She still went to sleep with the same ease which had initially surprised me. When 1 felt the rhythm of her chest, heard the steady pulse and softness of her breath, 1 knew 1 could roll back to my appointed side of the bed and, if day thoughts didn’t torment me, fall asleep in my own life, with a rumpled bedcloth to crease me.
          II . . . li . . . nois. I liked that name, that stream. It knew how to run, where to flow. Initially, the II . . . li . . . nois would slide a little way along her upper shoulder before turning down, would tend to seek cracks, where the arm rested against her body, or run a deep indentation at the waist, before falling between her buttocks to tiptongue—that lightly—over her anus to . . . nois’ home in the cleft of her cunt. But she would wiggle a little resentfully then, thinking 1 was trying to rouse her again, I suppose, though I wouldn’t have minded that, rivers always roused me, and once in a while 11 . . . li . . . nois would encounter the wad of Kleenex she used to mop me up with; 1 liked that, I thought it a fitting end to such a cunt-hunting river.
          It was more likely the Tippecanoe, though, which was campaigning for maybe a second entrance, by sliding suggestively over the round of Lou’s arm toward a breast, or fluttering like a decoying bird across her hip to slip down an inner thigh; but most often 1 was asking only to lie quietly spooned inside
          her, to purr there a bit perhaps, penis to pussy as if they were both pets, until she and I slept—it's what I called really sleeping together—sleeping until my body tingled and I turned over, she sighed and shifted too, and we could not love one another again till morning. Ah . . . what glorious times . . . life knows nothing better . . . and I was always amorous—at least when awake—no, wait—I also mounted my nightmares like a stallion—and Lou was receptive, even beneath a tree, in a park, nearly naked on a spit of sand like an island in the river. So I naturally thought we were having more than fun.
            It all ended, as so many of my rivers ended, in a vowel.
            The rivers I tried to inscribe, after Lou had fallen asleep, were more distant, less Midwest: the Danube, the Rhine, the Rhone, the Nile, and I spoke their names only in my deeply pillowed head: Dan . . . uuuu . . . b . . . uh. Broad from its inception, the Nile, too—done with the whole ball of my right thumb oozing over a ripple of rib—what a ride!—rose as its destiny demanded: to seek out darkest Africa—bubbled and flooded until an entire hand was needed to resemble its shape and size—rising, bubbling, flooding—coming to cup a buttock like a breast before it abruptly disappeared. The Cumberland, for some reason, went rapidily along its whole length, waving slightly from side to side like a swimming snake. Not the Ganges, though. That took a palm to depict, right from its source in the shoulder to its destination between her legs, where it would grip her sex, pursing those already pursed lips as if in pious disapproval of the gesture which caused the clasp to close.
            Rivers were a way of writing. And once, toward the end of our affair, I did inscribe across her broadest blankside: YOU NO LONGER LOVE ME, in capital letters, which didn’t, couldn't, flow, and which consequently roused her from the land of nod to mutter “wha—,” before she sank back into the arms of—as always—Morpheus again. Unrequited rivers. That was it. And it was in my repeatedly dry representations of the wet that I finally came to know the worst. The worst was 1 would never reach her, because it was quite impossible that she would ever feel for me a feeling so physical it quite transcended the body which its warmth otherwise merely washed against, which its caresses foamed over like rocks already submerged in sand, a body it then receded slowly from like any ordinary afterglow, another happily broken wave.
            Lou came, when she came, with dignity—with delight, yes—but not in the kind of delicious thrash-about pain 1 knew, which made a bent bow of me, which drove evil out of me like a purge—an enema, Culp would surely call it— and left me lighter by my worser half, left me the innocent I believe I’ve never been, naive as the painter’s depictions of the Nativity, where the only wise guys are the cows. I would lie back in the bed more inflated than a breath, yes, my god, filling with good will like rising bread, aglow to my toes, a cartoon cloud,
      what could be more foolish? and then through the low hum in my ears I would hear, Do rivers—and I would roll to my side and spoon her instead, resting my disembodied body well against hers so that when I held her I held myself as though at the end of a buoyant string (because what is a balloon but rubber-rounded air wanting to rise?), and then, safely moored, sigh as 1 released my pleasure from the hold my soul had on it, sigh with no doubt sickening sweetness, sigh like a cooling kettle, sigh into her upright shoulder, sigh along the length of the neck I was being asked to imagine served as the foothills of the Urals or some other major source of minor streams: Do rivers—so I’d part from her, both of us often sweaty with exertion, Lou wet with my sperm in addition,
      1 damp to the corners of my squeezed-tight eyes, whereupon we’d feel the cool air come between us like another caress, even on hot evenings, for all existence is comparison; and in that moment I’d try to take thought, imagine a small discreet stream, a thin flow over slate-flat rocks, perhaps, while at bankside grew tiger lilies in decorative clumps (the way they often doll up drainage ditches, Culp feels obliged to point out), and naturally I’d plant overhanging trees to cast some shade for the water to slide through unobserved except by bass who hide in the tree roots so the sun won't shine on their sides; thence from among the hairlets to proceed as stealthily as my whisper, Cuivre, Quiver River, into its first bend, my love now in the tip of my fly-light finger so only its nearness is felt—not it itself—as if one could most profoundly touch with what least did, thus did with utmost delicacy do it; for to go that far inside another, to come in range of the insubstantial, to be near enough another consciousness that consciousness bulges a bit at the point of your approach, is too frightening for the foreign world you are closing in on, especially if you are in any way rude or rough or even insistent. The fact is, the terrain, everywhere in that region, is too tender to take even a soft-shoe step, to accept even a new touch-tone tiptoe if it’s still attached to the foot. In short, within our ritual it was—to revert to resemblance once again—it was as though my rivering finger were to Lou’s skin as the water strider is to the surface it strides upon: a creature swollen with a sadness too wondrous, too gentle, too resigned, to break the tension which holds the drop which contains the tear.
         Wild eyes were another sign. It is something I have seldom seen—the expression of an ecstatic state—though much is foolishly written of them, as if they grew like Jerusalem artichokes along the road. The eyes are black, right enough, whatever their normal color is; they are black because their perception is condensed to a coal, because the touch and taste and perfume of the lover, the outcry of a dirty word, a welcome river, have been reduced in the heat of passion to a black ash, and this unburnt residue of oxidation, this calyx, replaces the pupil so it no longer receives but sends, and every hair is on end,
            though perhaps only outspread on a pillow, and the nostrils are flared, mouth agape, cheeks sucked so the whole face seems as squeezed as a juiced fruit; I know, for once Lou went into that wildness while we were absorbing one another, trying to kiss, not merely forcefully, not the skull of our skeleton, but the skull and all the bones on which the essential self is hung, kiss so the shape of the soul is stirred too, that’s what is called the ultimate French, the furtherest fuck, when a cock makes a concept cry out and climax; I know, for more than once, though not often, 1 shuddered into that other region, when a mouth drew me through its generosity into the realm of unravel, and every sensation lay extended as a lake, every tie was loosed, and the glue of things dissolved. I knew 1 wore the wild look then. The greatest gift you can give another human being is to let them warm you till, in passing beyond pleasure, your defenses fall, your ego surrenders, its structure melts, its towers topple, lies, fancies, vanities, blow away in no wind, and you return, not to the clay you came from—the unfired vessel—but to the original moment of inspiration, when you were the unabbreviated breath of God.
              Well, my language gives the game away. Orgasms pass more quickly than most pleasures. Last less than a length of licorice. Only illusions remain. The great moment is but a string of grunts. Piggly is wiggly for a while before the porker comes a cropper. Perhaps that is the sadness which overcomes fornicators when they separate: the significance of the gaze, the kiss, the caress, the groan, the thrust, the writhe with which lovers are—we say—sublimely occupied, is recognized, revealed, and described in a phrase like ‘cheap peek,’ sneaky feel,' ‘wet smooch,’ ‘last gasp’; by describing it as bumpydump and gicky, by calling it a fricatrix fiesta, a penis party, bum bash, gash gobble, tongue tie, frig fry, oil change, sperm spill, spit trade, clit lick, tit suck, cock crow, big blow; to be rancho randy and ready to rub-a-dub-dub; and looking for a ball bang, dong dance, ass blast, an excuse to get your rocks off, your clock cleaned, a chance to tear off a hunk and claim your piece of tail, to be laid to rest in pussy paradise. Language is always honest. Language does not lie, only its users. I think barrel suckers say that about guns. Notice how ‘lover’ is mostly spelled by using over,’ and ‘sex’ is two-thirds ‘ex.’ If fucking were pretty it would have a pretty name, like ‘meadow,’ like ‘gazelle,’ or ‘paramour.’ If fucking were so fundamental, then it would bind us more dearly and devotedly together, as its gestures pretend, instead of driving us away from one another, into our own close satisfactions or the sullen distance of our discontents.
              So ecstasy has made a laughingstock of me once or twice. But that is not why it cannot be forgiven. Nothing that intense, nothing that genuinely profound, whatever it looks like on the surface, should be certifiably counterfeit. The letdown is not like the double drag of departing for, and returning from, vacation.
       Nor is the emotion itself unreal. Oh, no. It happened. I was, as I am sure you were (when you were), transported. What was illusory was the feeling that it— the trip—would do the soul some service. When we landed, we would be covered in moonglow. Like that worm. Well, it did make a difference to us, but without making a difference in us. Not even birth is a greater breach of promise. The world is the same dismal day-to-day wake-to-work regimen, the same work-to-eat, eat-to-shit cycle, the same sleep-to-dream routine, sharing in order to quarrel over the cut, the same old same it was before sex made us insensible saints for a second or so. The PdP has simply enrolled a few more members.
         Do rivers. Do. 1 did. 1 did them. Long after they were rivers, really, when they were only lines forefingered on Lou's back and flank and beautiful bottom. The pretense was painful. What could the Mississippi be now that not even its lovely name was whisted, and its many locks counted, its great bluffs passed, the long broad line drawn gradually yet grandly down to the slowly spreading delta and the river’s cessation in the gulf?
         Humbly dumbly only to wash up. Washed up. Beached. But there were mostly banks to rivers. Where Anna Livia flopped her sheets upon the rocks. And the rivers wound themselves through silence, since Lou was fast slipping into sleep, even when their names were whispered, because you can’t draw a name out over an entire route, a whole body’s passage; there'd sometimes be a sound of sighing, of course, never total silence, what is that? there would be breathing, a line of it, parallel to the passage of the water—air lines, yes—and on each wrist a very faint ticking, or the deep creak of a bedspring as a body shifts, even possibly out-of-doors at a great distance the horn of a car can be heard, all so commonplace, while I lie in my rapture, body light as a bug’s case, rising only to river at Lou’s command, and drawing flow charts like the flight paths of thoughts through the dark. Is that really YDd® StaMM off ©sire-®€S®U@0i)®®g we’ve heard so much about? The bladder's music? What a relief it is to piss after a beery day. Suddenly 1 remember a habit I had as a kid. Urine was maybe the connection. 1 would turn the garden hose on to a trickle and let the water leak into the street. Then 1 would follow its flowing down the road, noting how, as I'd been told, it sought the low path always; how, balked by leaves and twigs, the stream crept secretly underneath its obstacle or skirted ends and edges when it could, piling up in puddles, running into cracks, forking as opportunity offered; but making manifest, as I realized, a collection of creek beds which had always been there, a system of incipient rivers, hidden in the concrete the way lines of poetry, perhaps, are hidden in the general terrain of a language, waiting only for a thought to take its course and gently connect one innocent word with an unsullied other till something repeatable, even memorable, is written, gets said, and a line is composed the way events, which
           seem fated to sing the do-re-mis of destiny, are linked: and to this extraordinary consequence shouldn't we award a suitable name (after all, every baby gets one on account and before any earnings), so why not? a name, say, like Sandusky, which will certainly serve a fine verse or sentence better, and more appropriately, than its present place.
             Sing Sandusky, Willie, it makes me want to moon the sun.
             Or take breath with the bees.
             Rivering was a recovery of composure, a return to normalcy, the revival of connection; for a river has a course which natural laws exist to determine, and a goal—that same mingle in the sea we call climax—and a renewal, too, when the hand which holds the finger returns the tip to the foothills of the head in order to begin again: the Chattahoochee maybe.
             The Chattahoochee tickles.
             The irony is—and ‘irony’ has 'iron' in it like a bar—that the transcendence some lovers feel they have attained in their most melting moments, their triumph over biology, over merely doing the soggydoggy, is more than a fugitive and futile illusion, for this lie—which suggests that you have together overcome lust—this falsehood is the unhappiest of merry hee-haws, since your screwing serves fertility first, foremost, and finally—the/-word knows who its kin (other fatuous fictions) are—yes, the crude and common action, which it so appropriately names, fosters only progeny; it aids, it abeds, that most common of miracles: kids.
             After the kids came, Martha no longer did. 1 was turned away like a tramp, and the door was coldly closed against the begging of my balls, the clucking of my cock, now that it had ceased to crow. Yet she expected me to love her kids. And carry them about on my shoulders. And feed the little shits the milk that should have been mine. And let them enjoy all those loving embraces I thought I had bought for myself, and watch them waste my time, in addition, as if I owed them my life, as if they had saved me from superfluity, as if 1 should be grateful for their presence. Wasn’t I their father, and therefore their sponsor? and servitor in addition? Well, 1 would rather forget my children’s names than the names of my rivers. Yet I cannot say that even those dreaming streams I freely made. Do rivers. 1 remember the command as a request. Nonetheless, I invented them, if not each one of their occasions. I was the father of those waters.
             Naming is knowing. Adam's task. The tines of a dinner fork. The paths of clouds. Whole days on which nobody dies. The spot on my back which will make me jump if it’s touched. Repeatedly. The food which dries on the rim of a dinner plate. The preparatory gig of a giggle. The way daydreams break off, embarrassed by their sappy self-indulgence. That ecstatic state in which names fall like fig leaves from all things. And you know there’s nothing you need to know
      or need to name. Though you’ll go ahead and christen it. Repeatedly. Consider the moment, then, when a river has run just far enough so its nature and name can be recognized . . . with a thazit. Generalized: the place or point of recognition. Thazit. Do Platte. No . . . thaz Beaver Creek. Thaz Gasconade. Broader. Less straight. Yet ahead of thazit, far upstream, slipping from the hairline, as I’ve said, like melting snow, in the moment before the moment, my river simply is. After thazit, what? recognition and a name. The river must repeat to remain in character, and then you can step into that same river twice. Now what my river is—sliding a thigh—is only what it was—slipping along an arm. Naming is the first condition of history. Repetition is the second. My finger forms a familiar line. Naming is knowing, all right, because the name is what we know.
         So what. Lou left. There was no more garden for my rivers to irrigate.
         Rivers refused to let me fall asleep following my satisfaction. Rivers required me to attend to Lou’s languidness, rather than my own. Rivers were the drift of a drifting mind, slipping along as the finger felt moved to do, without other design. Rivers were repletions, then, the utter opposite of ejaculation. Rivers were countercaresses. Rivers released Lou from the bondage of my love.
         I lie alone in my own room now and run rivers down the side of the dark. Ah . . . grand it is, indeed, to tickle nighttime’s thigh. Chattahoocheecoo-cheecoo. You will soon see stars, I say to the ceiling, say silently, of course, in that head where whispers go to die, and in due course 1 count the constellations—name by name—before pulling the covers over my head.
         I always resisted the temptation, the threat, to interpret my rivers as lines of life, mounts of Venus, and other omens of an onrushing fortune. I always resisted a similar curse upon the stars. No. The stars were the consequence of nature’s own orgasm. They were about as independently free as anything can be. You can't say you are going in circles, either, if your orbit is a billion miles.
         There are many rivers, those of forgetfulness, for instance, those which separate regions, the living from the dead, those which cleanse and those which flood and fertilize; but concerning mine—class, make a note—two kinds can be usefully distinguished: rouse rivers and release ones, although occasionally they are, to their surprise, the same, as though appetite fed on satiation. Most are signals of satisfaction, a few suggest a lingering insufficiency. Both kinds rebuild a world brought to pleasure's ruin, rejoin a scattered alphabet—pieces of a torn-apart god—to sound again like ABCs should. Both are lines of verse or sentences of a pointless prose; one, as it were, retightening the screws; one, as it were, spreading about the resulting ooze.
         Do Sandusky. Buried beneath the comforter, I obey. My finger scribbles over the creases in the sheet. 1 recite. Du musst dein Leben andem. Then, 1 have to confess, smothered by the pillow, 1 pity myself to sleep.
                Sweets
            f might have been seven or eight. Childhood doesn't include clocks. Well ... I might have been eight or nine. Nine. Nine is more likely. At least it doesn't include clocks that clock. Once upon a time 1 had a wooden clock and could fix its hands to any hour I hoped it was. So maybe—conceivably—I was ten. I must have looked a baby with my softly furred face, round as a drawing and pink as a postcard mailed from Miami. I should have had my foot on the— which rung? let’s see: preschool, kindergarten, first grade, second, third—no— fourth step of the ladder of life. The school I attended was in such a well-scrubbed residential neighborhood there was no storefront space where a luncheonette might lodge or a candy store suspend its Coca-Cola sign, although sweeteries could be commonly found near schools all over town. Every morning I would walk my baby body the six boring blocks to class, and then drag it back again in the late afternoon, lugging my books in a cardboard case the color of pup-tent canvas, the shape of a stack of neatly folded shirts. Except for a threatening dog now and then, or a bully boy whom fear had fattened (my father had told me it was fear they were full of), nothing but weather ever happened along the way. 1 remember 1 liked to skip. Skipping is like sailing, 1 suspect. Sailing is like singing. But I was six or so, surely, when I went to school skipping. If I felt bothered by the bully, who liked to plant his bulk in my path and try to transfer to me some of the fear he was fat from, 1 would dart around him, shouting "Fraidy fat, fraidy fat, fat fat fraidy’’ over my shoulder as I ran, and regularly outracing the wretch because, though a butterball myself, I could run as though rolling. If my flight was his triumph, his failure to nab me was mine. Occasionally he caught me, of course. Then he would punch me hard on the muscle of my arm and push me away with a laugh of scorn. Clearly his bullying didn’t amount to much. Every bully has a bully in his background, my father said. I wondered who his was. My bully had a habit of being tardy, so I soon learned that if I employed a brisk step our paths would never intersect. His shirt, I recall, was always loose as a blouse, but I can’t retrieve his name. Stained irremovably, with food spills the shape of lakes. Later he played football on the high school’s second team.
            Time is a great wit, though we rarely laugh at it. My clock had a cuckoo painted on its brow, and black wooden arrows where they said its hands should be. With my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I would make a loud
      thock when I moved the pointers, each thock so thick it could serve as the tick for an entire hour. Thock. Somebody told me skipping was for girls. Was it then 1 stopped? It seems like a dream: there was never such a school as mine, submerged in the past as the word ‘school’ suggests; there was never a Fat Freddie to torment at recess, when we would circle him, singing; and I was never that self who sang, who ran, who bellyached. My school is now a confused passel of flitting thoughts. It seems a dream because each piece of that past is brighter than anything is bright in present life, more real than real, like a toy. I had a painted puzzle, made of wood, which I tried to force into my considered shape for the United States. I forced. 1 failed. Nothing fit. I bellowed. And flung the pieces at the four corners of my condition. Which one was the one which was lost? When 1 couldn’t find it, I bawled. Of that moment of woe, I only remember an open mouth and a runny nose.
        Freddie. That’s him. Yeah.
                          Freddie at one—
                                            what?—
                          Freddie at two—
weighs a ton.
                                who?—
                          Freddie at three—
                                             he
is a greasy Jew.
                          Freddie at four—
                                                                 can’t climb a tree.
                                                                        still
                                                                         eats off the floor.
                            Freddie at five—
         Harding, Garfield, McKinley. The city’s schools were named for presidents. Taft, Pierce, Polk. I don’t think many of us knew who of these noble leaders had been assassinated; who had been illegally elected or made titillating through scandal; who had croaked while doing the bumpydump—our euphemism for the deed of darkness then. We believed that every famous man was famous for good, true, and sufficient reasons, but also that each one had died in the saddle or while committing some other sexual misdemeanor. It was the lore of schoolboy life or the lie of the land. Well, no . . . the lie of the land was the placement of Idaho, the identically featureless shapes of Colorado and Wyoming, the deceptive division of Michigan. Nevertheless, the state I misplaced when I flung the puzzle pieces from me in my peevish fit may have been Arkansas. Some such. 1 recollect there was, afterward, always a hole in the southern tier like a great lake. Like one of the stains on Freddie’s shirt.
             A more enduring complaint was the lack of a candy store at my own school—Taft. Taft was as portly as Harding, who also wore a watch chain and bore a big head above a black suit, both prexies sporting a sober and ambiguous sort of smile in their portraits, though it was Taft's picture, presumably, which hung in the principal’s office next to the state flag and a hoop which held a bronze basketball within its rim like a huge scoop of chocolate creaming in its cone. ‘For the lickings we gave to other teams,” the Prince would say to parents who came to complain about the spankings their children had received. 1 could swallow an entire day by thocking my ticks through a quick twenty-four—thickety thockthock. The day to come or the one passing through could be equally, easily, eaten. The Prince had a shark’s smile, as if his jaw were always open and his teeth were under water. "Sonny is complaining of a sore bottom, is he? His pants aren't thin from sitting in class like a scholar, 1 can tell you. It’s like beating the dust from a carpet—tanning your kid.”
             The Whacker didn’t have a hole like they said: a hole like Arkansas made in my puzzle as soon as the state went missing. It wasn’t light as a Ping-Pong paddle, either, though that was also alleged. Instead, it was long, thick, smooth, and shellacked like a table. Now, with more experience of the world, l would compare it to a cricket bat. As a consequence of my school’s lack of social services, 1 hadn’t a single soft cylinder of toffee to melt among my teeth, its remains during geography class clinging to my porcelains like a trace of turd in the toilet—no—so 1 suffered nary a dental cary (as the jingle went then), because the system had betrayed me, denied, gainsaid, deprived my teeth and tongue of their pleasure; and, while I walked or skipped to school, I searched for the place where the store should have been, even if my eyes were out of breath and fearful from a bout of bullyrag; singing the scales we were meant to memorize—fa sol la, fa sol la ti do; and I imagine my beloved’s alluring trade name spelled out in the physical shape of the shop as if the shop were all sign like the house of the old woman who lived in a shoe. It was a referent unspecified and missing, maybe, but I felt it was simply in limbo, like Arkansas somewhere under the sofa, the state’s shiny surface softened by dust, and out of even an insect’s interest.
             Dust always means death. In the dictionary it does. Sure. To beat one’s way to dusty death, didn’t we memorize? along with do re mi, gamuting at a gallop, singing, sailing, skipping along the sidewalk of life. O what a dusty answer gets the soul when it trills the rills, metering mightily, didn’t we memorize? Ut queant laxis resonare fibris Mira gestorum famuli tuorum, what? sol. . . Solve polluti labii reatum, learning goes on as long as it’s in song, Sancte lohannes, hey, how about that for a mouthful of what the paddle taught the ass? it turns the jaw to chop chop, the skull to skull dust, drives the tongue to do the cloddy thockthock, all
       together longgonging the daytune, always ending with the low do on the pay scale, oh gee, music, what fun it was to be a kid and kazoo the culture.
          There were candy stores at all the other schools. It was unfair. It was an injustice that my Taft had no ‘Mffe® [rtoGflS® or (S®@fc8® €M(p)ftD®fflircd], especially when the cheeks of Taft's portrait looked stuffed; when his watch chain rested on his belly like a snake in the sun. There were no holes bored in the palm of the Prince’s paddle, as I’d heard, to facilitate its easy movement through the air. No. It was solid through and through, wood from heart to handle. Rhode Island occasionally hid under Nevada or Texas, but it was nevertheless reliably somewhere, recoverable. The McKinley School had                        tofflfi)®(rs,
       though the store wasn’t on one. Harding High had the IrOfHRefag) Sw®®ft§to(p, whose lavatory walls were papered with Petty Girl posters and where lines on the floor purported to be the graphic realization of an ejaculation contest. High boys pissed there, after all, and had hair on their privates. I quit skipping because I couldn’t come, and someone had said I should be able if I weren’t really a closet Mabel, with only a girl’s grin beneath my boxer briefs. Come to what, I wondered. He ain’t up to it, my frigger said. Well, I was up to the candy counter well enough. Mabel (the older boys would sing), get off the table, 'cause I was only foolin’ you. I let some pimpled kid, in training to be a fairy, fool with it. You can’t, he said. Cum. Lot I knew. To me, sex was like the candy bar (what did we say?)—only a snicker. Just because I had a dollar bill in my hand . What I wouldn't have done with a dollar. That’s no reason for you to go an’ misunderstand . What was it, I couldn’t? Can’t what? I thought. Drive a car? swallow a worm? I can’t, like Superman, see through steel. Keep from crying while being paddled. I won’t, like Sammy Glick, shit in my hat. Which “can’t” was the can’t I couldn’t? the can’t my frigger and his friends—they meant?
          There was Garfield. Yellow brick building as run-down as back stairs. It was said to be the school of choice for spades. Yet Garfy had the Maoft [fM. Goober’s tubers. Paper shades shaped like peanut shells were wrapped around dim amber bulbs which hung from its ceiling. In the dark and after hours, those rows of dangling Maidenforms must have resembled a colony of snoozing bats. Suitable for the souls of spooks. R.I. was cute; 1 had no opinion of Indiana; but Idaho was ugly; it had the outline of an uprooted tree. The wind would whistle through the paddle holes, they said; but there were no holes, the wind didn't whistle, the board was suddenly there—there against your backside: bumbam. The holes were meant to blister you, polka-dot your bottom, they said; but there were no holes, and you felt your flesh redden as if it were frying, redden in a long swatch of shame like a blush so severe it left a bruise. Freddie at ten. Yeah. We sang the Fat Freddie tune to the tenth rhyme. So I must have been . . . Freddie at ten—what? clucked? no, it wouldn’t have been. He went
             out like a match in the ring of wind I had arranged for him. We would wag our fingers in his sweaty face. How red his cheeks became, like tomato puree. Ten. Pecked? nah. And not hopped. What? Laid. Like a hen. Ten. 1 was ten. 1 had to be—have been—ten. No wonder 1 couldn't come. I must have looked like a lady baby skipping along to school, swinging my suitcase like Little Red Riding Peep, fa sol la-ing all those years from five to ten, skimming the sidewalk like a thrown stone, staying ahead of Fat Freddie, no longer intersecting him, no longer having to endure the soreness of molested muscle.
               The Coolidge School would get built a few years after the legislature found the funds—forced by a boomlet in babies, 1 suppose—and then silent C®D’g Satras!)^ (Saira® would open its alliterating doors not a penny’s pitch away; but not even a furtive vendor soiled the sidewalks near my Taft. I lived on sweet-safe streets. So what did we sing for Freddie at seven? Beats me. Did some company manufacture paddles the way they did guns, and advertise them in catalogues for Princes and their pals to pick from?
                              We sell only solid ash or hickoiy, such as are used in baseball bats, with good balance like bats too, having a fine heft, smooth handle, polished so assiduously an aimed-at pant will find its image flattened in the wood grain, a paddle silent in swishing, full of natural whack, long as a licking and the length of both butts, holeless so that both smacker and smacked will receive full value, its design top grade in eveiy detail, guaranteed not to crack.
               Nothing rhyming with ‘heaven,’ chiming with ‘driven.’ Freddie at ten then? Laid like a hen? nah. As far as my chant went, he got no older. Maybe he was also a Mabel—the flabby-shirted fatso—whom I instinctively hated because he bore my future form. All right. A Mabel . . . maybe. They were called [OT<gfc)®[fi)S, but they weren’t kitchens. They weren’t comers. They weren’t huts or hideaways or PsaiMt Palla<g®s, either. UTn)®          Cawsirtfi) wasn't a cave.
             They were cool and dark and odoriferous, though. The scent of citron and ginger and cinnamon colored the air, and the smell of chocolate was everywhere like a shared low whistle of surprise. The promise of pleasure is a pleasure as insidious and enervating as a pain: there were all those liquids waiting to be drunk, all those creamies eager to be licked, those buttons begging to be bitten, chewies to be chewed, mallows to be gently mushed, leisurely tongued, and slowly swallowed.
               Certain sweets were apparently essential, and these could be found in every shop, in company with the slogans which repeated their odd, enticing names,
       the signs which recited their virtues, including the calm which came from chewing gum (it was ruminative, inducing a cowlike docility), the deep-down goodness you would come upon in sodas, ice creams, cupcakes, cookie jars (which I always felt referred to final sucks, last licks, long reaches, the crumbs that clung to the muffin paper like life to life), the bursts of energy in kinds of candy bars, just beneath the wrappers, that were waiting to be released (a rush of sugar which would make you giddy with git up and go). All the stores had glass- or marble-topped counters, display cases, cash registers, ice chests, cheerless moms, disgruntled pops, and sometimes, serving you, their embarrassed resentful kids. Spaces were dark, small, crowded, secure in feeling like a winter den. So it was natural that, in many ways, these places should seem interchangeable. They each sold suckers which were wide and round as faces, and some which even had eyes and mouths and noses on them. There were suckers narrow and flat like tongue depressors, or the Prince’s spanking bat; there were suckers with suddenly soft centers, suckers as hard as glass, and transparent, too, when smartly licked; there were suckers the size and shape of paddle balls, in all the true fruit flavors, as well as spheres inhabited by root beer, reds made hot through some indeterminate spice, intense and bracing spearmint, slow caramelly melts, thick double-chocs.
         1 remember pans of fudge in regimented squares, shatters of peanut brittle, flat slabs of maple sugar, each surface roughed with raisins, chopped nuts, currants, bits of glazed fruit, or coated with shreds of coconut like frozen blades of grass. The shops sold rubbers, some said, if you knew what to say, and asked the old man in the right sort of whisper. They certainly sold cigs on the sly, adhesive reinforcement circles for your notebook, plus wide-lined paper and ink in several waterlogged tints. They had erasers like hats you could cover the bald end of your pencil with. Barrettes. Clips. Tin pins with smartassy quips on them. Kite twine and kites for the few weeks of wind, wax lips and funny faces at Halloween, egg dyes at Easter, stickers, tags, ribbons, and wraps for the Christmas season. Blood pads for periods, some said, if you knew what to say, and asked the fat missus primly, politely—if you presented your need as one innocent, unforeseen, desperate, virginal.
         Sugar seemed the center of all satisfaction, and I am inclined, now, to regard it as a symbolic substance . . . well, not as a substance, really, rather as the ultimate adverb of value. Grainy as sand, soluble as salt, sugar was nevertheless a softener, not a sharpener, of sensation, taming the acidulous fruits, cooling the spices, smoothing the sharp, rough edges of brickies and crackles, warming ices. There was the colored sugar which covered cookies, the fine white sugar which snowed small cakes and powdered shortbread balls, and the sugar which had been bubbled in a broth of milk, chocolate, jam, and ground al-
            monds, sugar which had been burnt, sugar raw as a cold carrot and brown as mud, sugar as refined as one of the legendary Lowells, pure and white as a supremacist.
               Sugar slid things past the palate so agreeably a person might willingly swallow a roach or a smart remark from a spiteful spouse if its frosting were creamy and rich and thick enough.
               Mom and Pop pulled the window shades down against the sun, but there would always be a streak or two of light upon the counters coming from cracks in the old dry blinds. Faint reflections would rise from the scratched glass like still more odors to be added to an already complex medley, drifting dustily among the jars and sifting across the candy cases, carrying fragmentary memories of its journey, gathering faint tinges and dispersing a wan warmth. It was a sad, introspective, yet satisfying light, as if the way it lay on things were gentle, wise, and right. The cellophanes and foils gleamed too, but that was on account of the electric, which possessed an altogether different and less subjective illumination. Slick wrappings, pale stiff frostings passed that light along twisted lengths of licorice, which it made seem molten, until the light lay as if submerged in slow pools of dark cake, and went out at last in black, lavalike lakes of bitter chocolate.
               1 always counted the multicolored jellybeans in their large jars, just in case there'd be a contest to guess the number. 1 strained to read the faintly printed messages on those heart-shaped candies, sentiments placed squarely in the center where, on trees, “Tom loves Mary” got carved, though many were a mystery to me, like “oh you kid” and "monkey’s uncle.” Exactly what “twenty-three skiddoo” meant, I could not imagine. And 1 loved looking at the conical kisses in their silver foil—kisses with narrow paper fuses—kisses we called “love droppings," and later (older, wiser) I called “Fujis,” after the mountain. Some kids claimed, as if they knew, that unwrapping them was like baring a nipple.
            1 liked to flatten the foil and smooth out its wrinkles with my thumbnail. Then I’d pile the squares in stacks like sheets of silver in a mint.
               They glittered so grandly: aspenlike leaves of light.
               TTlh)® InlaiHaltog) ODSgjlhl §w®@ta®@d S0ti©p was a far larger establishment than the others. It sold phosphates and sodas, sported big cakes beneath glass covers, boasted stools, malt mixers, spigots seltzer bubbled from like beer. It had piles of packaged pretzels and potato chips, caramel corn and Cracker Jack, molasses cookies and sesame wafers. But every shop, however modest, offered milkballs, butterscotch, niggerbabies, gumdrops, jawbreakers, horehound, hot hearts, jujubes, caramels cut in soft brown cubes, strings of red licorice more tangled than yarn, taffy stale as the salt water it was said to be made with, Life Savers resembling cylinders of small change, silver
        shot in incipient spills, wafer sandwiches filled with vanilla, fruit slices and candied dates, root beer barrels, almonds enameled like store-bought teeth, Tootsie Rolls, chunks of chocolate in random hunks like turned-up peat, cookies covered with a crust of white frosting, gingerbread, cupcakes, and fresh fruit pies the size of one’s palm, as well as prominently placed boxes of candy bars wrapped in the marks of their trade: Butterfingers, Baby Ruth, Snickers, Oh Henry!, Hershey, Bit o' Honey, Clark, Mars, Milky Way, Powerhouse, Chiclets, and, for a time, Forever Yours. There were peppermint sticks and mint patties, wintergreen gummies in the shape of Irish leaves, and creamy yellow butter mints in noisy see-through sacks. In the big oak icebox, behind its clouded glass door, you could still identify bottles of lemon-lime, Orange Crush, Squirt, and grape soda, and make out the ranks of Nehi, Royal Crown, and Iron Brew, as well as the huddled bodies of a ginger ale which claimed it came from Canada to loft its zingy bubbles up your nose. Packets of Kool-Aid were stacked in wire racks like flower seeds, each packet bearing a pitcher brightened by colored water and enlivened with drowning parallelograms of ice. In the floor case, with the ice creams, were the Popsicles, drumsticks, and Eskimo pies, along with some candy bars frozen to a state only a gnaw could know.
          1 think I loved the richly decorated canisters almost more than their contents, and 1 subscribed with the fervor of a youthful heart to the idea of life which each of these stores seemed to represent: an ideal you began to serve as soon as you entered their doors, since you were immediately assailed by all the perfumes of pleasure; you were confronted by cases where trays and tins and jars of goodies were arrayed, by counters covered in packages bedizened with a sheen of stars; and you knew that beneath each fancy wrapping tied with its satiny ribbon was a richly hued and well-wrought box containing, in its turn, a treasure seductively clothed and reclining on a bed of crumpled tissue; further, that within the splendidly gleaming thing itself were sweets of all sorts wound in scintillating papers, while underneath that ceaseless shimmer could be found peanuts, raisins, dollops of jelly, chunks of toffee, cores of caramel and flavored cremes, each coated in chocolate the way silk slips obey yet conceal their appealing bodies; so that first of all you had to approach the object of your worship, sometimes walking blocks on a dull cold day, and then you had to complete the commercial ritual: inspecting, choosing, expressing your wishes by pointing, by putting a name to your desire, and paying its price too, before taking it—as if in no hurry— into your hands, then almost leisurely turning to leave before your fingers began to act upon the wrappings (since there was a rule against eating on the premises), sauntering a short way, still shy as if you carried a bottle in a
           brown paper bag, appearing surprised that the sweet has been released from its conventions, but bringing it diffidently to the mouth where its final resistance melts away, and you have a bit of marshmallow to enjoy for a moment, or an anonymous surge of sugar, a taste of some exotic spice, a pop of mint, as the candy makes a second genital of the tongue, and before you think about, and seek uneasily for, another piece: insecure because you are aware you may become bored or sated; insecure because you fear the supply may run out; insecure because you wonder, after all, if it is worth it— the many-blocks walk on such a cold dull day, the loss of loose change, a perhaps too hopefully expectant state of mind—just for this bit of butterscotch, this nub of hazelnut, this soft blob of perhaps unmerited reward, this precious though transient gift of pleasure—ruinous to the teeth, the figure, the complexion—but prized because, in a life so founded on the continued useful operation of the senses, there was this pure, inherently idle, injudicious and indulgent sensation.
             THhl®              §lh)®p at Harding High, so splendidly equipped, sold
           cones they scooped and packed by hand, frozen cakes which were layered with flavors and covered with ground-up nuts, those Popsicles in banana, root beer, grape, and lime flavors which you had to separate like a surgeon into separate licking sticks, warm homemade caramel corn, jawbreakers as yellow as mustard, and metal kazoos in automotive colors. They had yo-yos which hummed a tune, paddle bats with spongy red balls tethered to them, magic slates and magic squares, trinket rings and rice beads, police whistles made of stiff silvered cardboard whose shrieks were the outcries of clowns in clownish grief, not the calls of even Keystone Kops to one another, alerting the world to a crime. There were kaleidoscopes wrapped in what 1 would later realize were papers of a Florentine design, silly ornamented mirrors which reflected for you an apelike, doglike, or owlish face, puzzles fashioned from shrewdly bent nails, kooky combs (looking like barbed wire or buckteeth), and then, to startle enemies and amuse friends, fart bulbs for whoopee cushions, long obese worms in mating pairs, and a few lead horseflies trying to look obnoxious and alive.
                           Sarah has an Easter bunny tucked beneath her little tummy.
                           If you give her candy money, you can pet that Easter bunny she has tucked beneath her tummy.
           Of course, every such Sarah was as hairless at that age as a toadstool. 1 learned, early on, that poets lie.
                       Sarah says she soon feels funny, when you pet her Easter bunny, and if you get the bunny runny, she’ll give back the candy money, she has tucked beneath her tummy.
       Which wasn’t true either.
                       If Sarah says that she feels funny, because you’ve got her bunny runny, she’ll start to call you “little honey,” which isn’t worth the candy money, she has tucked beneath her tummy.
         So on Saturday, with the quarter which was my allowance for the week clutched in my left fist, I would set out for a sweetshop near another school, preferably the one by Harding High, although it was farther away than most— a hefty hike, really. I needed to keep back a dime for the Saturday matinee, and a nickel for goodies to eat through the show. I would reserve five cents for dire emergencies or overwhelming urges, which left me with enough to buy five pieces of penny candy. I always knotted my change in a hankie which I then stuffed deeply into a pants pocket, and I held the sack’s twisted neck in the same fist I initially squeezed my quarter with, skipping sometimes in eager anticipation of my feast, pirouetting on the pavement, dodging the bullets of imaginary bandits, fending off a pretend Fat Freddie, since 1 was suddenly full grown, momentarily bearded, immortal, in the movies.
         1 preferred to buy candies which were wrapped, not just because I loved the wrapping, which I saved when I could, but also because I liked to study each piece, arranging them in rows, in more complex configurations, concealing them in innocuous little boxes, and hiding these about my room with the uncanny skill of a secret agent. From such unseen places they emitted an energy only 1 could intercept, and I fed on them in this fictional fashion before 1 finally swallowed them, which 1 did eventually, consuming only one at a time, however, and at decent intervals, never as a feast, an orgy of incontinence, a vulgar glut. In fact, although each time, before my purchase, 1 imagined them all in my mouth at once, pornographically commingled and surmounted, one by another, 1 had to force myself to eat them before the end of the week arrived, when 1 would acquire, as was my comforting and oppressive habit, a fresh batch. Some sweets grew stale when they were overlooked; when they were mislaid, they furred the way the state of Arkansas drew lint; or they soft-
           ened to a gooey gob or wrinkled like a prune if their hiding place itself was hidden, the candy, then, more undercover than a spy, lost to ordinary life but not to worms or mold or melt or rot; each—the little box, its secret spot, the thrice-concealed treasure—become a corpse, a coffin, an accommodating grave.
              The point about the puzzle bits was, 1 suppose, that when chance was in charge, the chances were that at least one piece of those thrown would skid and carom strangely, reaching a place which no one hunting could guess at or remotely imagine; and the point was that things frequently took that course in daily life: there were shivers of broken glass which flew from the floor and point of breakage through the crack of an open cupboard door to settle in a tin in which muffins would be subsequently baked; you would sit on the only bee the arbor harbored, snap the frame of your glasses settling them more firmly on your nose; so the point was, 1 suppose, that a feeling for someone, a thought, perhaps about a little legal matter, a mot you considered for a moment bonny, might similarly be shoved aside by circumstances like the arrival of a guest, an abrupt stop in heavy traffic, and lie there lost, wherever it ended up, unrecoverable by any strategy—a gesture of gentleness, perhaps, a theory of evanescence, or an idea about the causes of drought—there to fade, fuzz, grow wan, or wrinkle into numerous ancillaries and instances and so many ifs as to be unrecognizably a gesture of any kind, a thought at all, were it to be encountered again by equal accident.
              The best kind of candies were those which coated the tongue so it looked red or brown or green in the mirror, and whose flavor lay in the mouth like an Oriental rug—mint, say, and chocolate, intertwined. TUffi®          I^op
           was all the paradise I needed, but I couldn't sing and celebrate it as some Big Rock Candy Mountain (I never understood that out-of-doors conceit). For me it was a mouth of the soft inviting sort one would later so hungrily kiss that tongues tangled and teeth got muted; it was even the mouth of a whale, say, where Jonah and the fishes lived for a while—mouths in a mouth—before being swallowed or sieving out; it was the mouth of a cave which was redolent with spices and oils and other pungents, a cavern of smooth pastes and granulations, syrupy walls, sweet steamy vapors, the drip of a sugary rich saliva from the roof as regular as a water clock counting off the eaten hours, not with a thock but with a light tip tip tip that took some attention to discern and which was more often than not missed in the immediate storm of cinnamon or maple, flavors which released the juices in the corners of the jaws and closed the teeth into a deep creme as though they were biting on a bone.
              I said I saved wrappers. I will still, in an absent mind, pull tight and stretch out the foil which has protected an after-dinner mint or concealed the chocolate which the hotel maid has left like a commercial kiss on the hostelry pillow, as if to encourage my teeth to decay during the indifference of my dreams. Cel-
       lophane makes a happy sound while being unwrapped, like a little hearth fire crackling. Its true visual is the crinkle of a smile. But lead and tin foils whose every fold fractured the light were my favorites. 1 caressed the paper, soothing its soul, as it were, pressing on those outer edges which had often been twisted toward a knot or folded as firmly flat as Doublemint wrappers were, returning the sheet to its pristine condition like a linen to its closet, as if it had never been upon a bed and knew neither sleep nor argument nor love.
          Candy bars were often double-dressed, and placed upon a slick dark cardboard sled, as the mounds of chocolate-covered coconut were in Almond Joy: first the bright dress, then the dark slip, finally the slab. These layers were like the round world unpeeled as a map, or the shed skin of a snake displayed on some suitably weathered board. Over a delicate and glittery chemise, the Her-shey bar slipped its name on a deep brown sleeve, and in order to preserve the sleeve’s full unfolded nature, it was necessary to pull apart the glued seam of the tube, a delicate business, instead of simply stamping it flat like those cigarette packs one sometimes saw run over in the road: more car kill. I suggested to my frigger, who was of course far older than I, that it might be amusing to see how his prick looked sheathed in a Hershey’s chocolate jacket, but he called me crazy and wouldn’t take his out after that—not even to wink. What’s the point of being a cock lover if you can’t dress it like a dolly now and then; if you can’t be a bit inventive; if you can’t have a little fun? So what if 1 couldn't come? I could at least imagine.
                       Sarah says her bunny’s yummy, when sweetened by her little honey, a licking that, for love or money, makes her cheeks as warm and sunny as the tuck beneath her tummy.
                       If you serve as Sarah’s dummy, to pet and play with Sarah’s bunny, and let her keep the candy money, while she calls you “little honey,’’ just remember fun ain’t funny,
                       neither is the love of money,
                       Sarah’s got beneath her tummy, nor the yearn to be a mommy and bear another Easter bunny she can call her “little honey.”
              There were wrappers which looked good enough to eat; wrappers 1 ripped and shucked, peeled back for a nibble; wrappers I wadded and balled into a gutter going home, as I often was when I was eating; and despite my habit of smoothing them out—of hanging them like clothes carefully over a chair—I knew I’d sometimes be in the mood for a treat, and had saved at least one sweet in case ... in case; because, homebound from school, I had to devour the candy quickly—it was a presnack snack—and wipe away all trace of sugar and spice before accepting the dying day's rejuvenating glass of milk and, on a plate, a slice of my mother’s toast topped by a layer of always nourishing peanut butter, the swirl of its application left in the spread like the flourish of a palette knife.
              I would emerge from the store into ordinary air like some Sinbad from a journey, my poke in my pocket, my sack in my hand, secure in the ordinary world because I had so far survived the magical. Later I would read of brothels which were got up like that, like seraglios, like candy kitchens: lips of wax, breasts of meringue, nipples in the shape of chocolate drops, cunts like puzzles made of interlocking nails. You could look down on a shining expanse of thigh and see yourself in the shape of a phallic shadow seeking the space where Arkansas once went. West Virginia was without form, as if a spill had been caught in midsplash. That’s the way I once remembered it: Blobbyland. Cap. Puddlesville. Pop. Goats. Soc. Org. Feud. Prod. Stills. Crop Coal. Unlike most kids, I always wanted to postpone, then prolong, my pleasure, because I somehow sensed that it was a curtain which rose, when pleasure lifted, only to reveal, in good medieval fashion, the skull beneath the skin, the wooden clock which thocked only when 1 thocked, the horror show which happy times had concealed.
              This was quite literally a shortsighted attitude. The truth of the imagery could be reached only when its course was completely run. If there was a skull beneath our powdered, shaven, coarsened skin, the brain nevertheless lay like a mollusk safely inside that protective shell, which, after all, gave shape to the face which would otherwise be a sack with no attraction; and if one kind of time was determined solely by my placement of painted arrows, I was merely mimicking the more trustworthy version which stood by my parents’ bed and roared its ring every morning; while it, for its part, with its tocky motions, ineptly tried to ape the smooth and periodic passage of the sun. There are Forms, and there are copies. Thus the pain which pleasure is accused of covering up— such pains of the spirit as melancholy, helplessness, ennui, which can fill life like an atmosphere, all the hurts of the unloved, the loneliness of rented rooms, the emptiness of the stored bowl, tarnish on an idle knife—are themselves a response to the fact that life without candy’s secondary pleasures, liquor’s wooze, the smoker’s nervous discharges, food’s fatful securities, is bleaker than the moon, even if one has carried out every plan and exercised
      every talent, done one's duty and then some, performed faithfully the rites of spring and church and matrimony; because, for the plain straight telling of the time, the wooden clock is preferred (we would rather cozy up to a copy than close in on a Form); because Colorado ought to fit in Arkansas’ space after only a bit of trimming; because skipping deserves to be continued into briefcase days; but we know that something is wrong with the way the world has been made when, in addition to the doing of desirable deeds, there has to be the melting of some sweet reward in the mouth, the equivalent of a carnal caress, a little rubadubdub, spot of tonguing, a taste of Pattie s cake, before the work of existence will seem worthwhile; and it's not that we might not persevere like an anchorite, toiling at otherwise unsatisfying tasks, living as meritoriously as a monk in a candy-clean community, denial the blazon on our shield, because we do—we do—we do it; but virtue for virtue’s sake, faith without reason, art for art, and other purities of purpose will not suffice for happiness unless ideals can be betrayed on a regular basis, virtue laid bare occasionally and raped without respite, if only on the sly; it will not suffice to be in love if you can't hold that love with floured hands and roll it into a breakfast bun or a crust for pie now and then; it simply won’t be enough if you can’t chuck your work, and besmirch your honor, enclose your cock in a candy wrapper; if you can’t break a window with a brick or board, if you can't beat up a bully, cry wolf while petting the lamb in its jaws, dance a gleeful dance to celebrate another's dying; for up pops the question when dessert is served: where is the cherry? so we all require a spoon or two of sugar to sugar the sour truth that sugar is a necessity, that simple sufficiency is insufficient, that most prizes feel like penalties, that justice is but the beginning of what we want when what we want is to be unfair, since on a mountain made of more and more still more must be peaked, that after the dinner the diner appreciates his personal pot of coffee, with a snifter of brandy to follow, then the mint, perhaps a fondle through the trouser pocket, with luck a libidinous wink to the tune of a clink of glasses, the aromatic suck on a cigar, maybe a thigh slide hidden by the table, nibble of fingertip, napkin now covering the crumbs, and so to bed where skin shall kiss skin, ad in-, and dreams shall be deliciously depraved, infin-, till breakfast is brought in the bluest of mornings, infin-, infin-, ad infinitum.
        I must have been eleven—twelve—when the punchboards began to show up in the shops. There were penny, nickel, dime, and quarter boards: mats as gridded as graphs and covered with a thin yellow-brown paper which looked both ancient and Chinese to me, like the wrappers around firecrackers— faintly waxy, faintly hued. With a peg which was attached to the board by a string, you pushed out a tiny tightly pleated tube of paper, then pulled flat the folds to read the news: “you lose.”
             The news was always a number. Each punchboard had a lid which lifted straight back and stood there on a slant to prop up its “honeycomb" like a billboard by the highway. Here the rules of play were printed—kept simple for our simple minds—as well as a list of the winning numbers, along with the loot their possession entitled you to claim. The penny board promised nickel candy bars and pound boxes of the finest chocolates. A ten-dollar bill was the grand prize. Much older men began to show up in the shops to play the quarter board, and it was amusing to watch them trying to pull the little pills of paper flat with their thick bitten-back fingernails. Clearly, they had had no experience with wrappers. They shouldered their way in, played with hasty purpose, and left abruptly, looking grim, apparently oblivious to the seductiveness of heaped sweets, the light which sang of sugar, the heavy smell of spice, and the snickering of us kids, compelled into corners.
             We were indeed living in grim times, my father said. And the men in the mills were on strike. Soon more and more of them could be seen standing around in small groups, angry and furtive. A quarter was an honest piece of change, the price of a haircut just as the jingle claimed, and Mabel could be persuaded for a buck to splay her body on a table and even giggle as we kids did when some guy took his chances with her. The strike was worse than war and looked to last longer, my father said. He wasn’t on the workers’ side, though, and did some extra hours inside the plant when he wasn’t at his regular job. “Scab!” the strikers catcalled while parading past our porch, scaring my one wit away, my father said, so 1 couldn’t study, and consequently went to school unprepared, sassing my teacher when she complained of me pretending to sleep at my seat, a seat soon after to endure—poorly—the Prince’s primal swats, swats which put a stop to my skipping, because I’d been called a scab, then a snippy pipsqueak, finally a crying baby, all on the same day.
             I must have been ten to twelve. The workers were too lazy to work, my father said, but they could still kick you to death. Their quarters rang on the glass like requests for beer. Yet 1 never saw them leave with a wet mouth the way 1 supposed they would leave a saloon. Meanwhile I began my brief gambling career with mints. These cost a couple of cents and were thin and simple, crudely covered by circles of silver. How huge the men felt to us, bulking about in their big coats, crowding us into corners where we giggled to get revenge. They would smother a rolling coin with a fat hand. Mom or Pop or their sullen kid slid the quarters into a cigar box—nickels, dimes, my pennies too—keeping the punch-board profits separate from the candy take which went into the register drawer as it normally did. 1 was always surprised by the size of the piles I saw in the box.
             If you bit into a mint which was pink, you won a prize, although I cannot remember what the prizes were. I don’t think it ever mattered much. Winning, it-
      self, was the trophy. [ would bite white, time after time. At first I pinched only enough pennies from the family hoard to recover my allowance, but 1 soon grew tired of the sleazy little minties, and advanced my hopes to the nickel board, pushing out slip after slip of wrong numbers, and watching my sugar money get slickered away, each nickel falling with a faint chink down among the other victims. Eventually, still hoping to be in the pink when 1 bit into white meat once again, 1 would throw the remainder of the candy away in disgust; but after 1 gave up on the mints and began to punch, I saved my slips the way I once had saved wrappers, even though the slips, one and all, were losers. 1 stashed them in a Diamond Safety side-scratch matchbox where, released from their tube, and because they were accordions in character, they continued to express little local motions of expansion, and lay like larvae in what seemed a lively confusion.
         At first 1 thought 1 was Mr. Big . . . betting. I thought I was Mr. Smart besides, because 1 got a piece of candy for my money as well as the gift of the main chance, grand prize. However, the candy was grainy, oversweet, a trifle stale; the mint flavor was harsh and weedy, the chocolate coating thick as thin paint, while the paper it came wrapped in was like cello without the phane.
         Soon I was short of change. The sweet I wanted now had nothing about it that was cloying, nothing that was sticky, nothing chewable; it was one whose deep internal sugars had been superseded, and would bitterly dissolve in the heart’s mouth, since it could be found only in fruitless expectation: in the belief that pink would surely show up in the next pick, after my fingers had burrowed beneath the top lot in the box, while Mom or Pop frowned at the way I was feeling around for good fortune, for a sign, something which would say the world wished me well and that fate was on my side, smoothing my past as though it had wrapped a winner, smiling at me, showering me with wholly unearned and therefore truly genuine success.
         1 wished to hear from the country of my daydreams, a land which would alter all my addresses so I no longer lived where 1 had; where the air would launder my skin like clothes and 1 was hardly even me; where 1 hadn’t any parents, knew nothing of little provincial neighborhoods, was so bright as to be beyond school, capable finally of coming on command like a collie dog, skipping skips which drew gasps, and smiting fat boys with smites which caused them to fly apart like glass. In the pockets of that perfected place change jingled as loudly as an alarm for morning, and out of white butcher-paper bags 1 would toss jellybeans and toffee, the way kings had once flung ducats, to make sure I’d always be followed by an adoring, repeatedly greedy, multitude of fans—starlings for whom I would show a cardinal’s pious disdain.
         In the bedroom of my parents, beyond the broad bed and against a far wall, was my mother’s cream-colored dressing table, its curvaceous edges enhanced
           by gold lines. There she combed her hair and put on makeup—whatever women did to fancy up their faces—and wedged into both rear corners of that relentlessly feminized piece of furniture, like nests jammed in a tree fork (because the top had a rim around three of its sides), were small triangularly shaped and cleverly lidded boxes: places to put wads of swabbing cotton or tubs of powder, hairpins or earrings—I’m not sure. The right-hand corner was the one where my parents’ spare pennies went—the leftovers of minor purchases. It was a room I rarely visited, and it always seemed a little ghostly to me because its windows were so continuously curtained, and because the big bed, with its crocheted white coverlet, collected what little light was let in, like a catch basin in an arid clime, to form a colorless puddle surrounded by shadow and silence too, since the hush was also heavy, and I heard my breath as if standing in the cold and watching it cloud.
             I slunk in once, raised the lid to stare at the munificent heap, and so disagreeably felt the tug of temptation that I sent a rush of blood to shame my face. Whereupon, I meticulously backed out in my tracks to confuse pursuers.
             Squirrels approach a feeding hand in the same way—with creeps and retreats—until the peanut is possessed and confidence grows, greed overcoming fear, anticipation supplanting suspicion. The first time I crossed that implicitly prohibited private space, intending to filch a few pennies, the mirror above the dressing table drew my identity, improving the accuracy of its image as I approached, and posting my guilt, I felt, in front of every eye. I counted out two tarnished cents, then two more, finally two more coins, most carefully—sums sufficient for three mints, three dashed hopes, three miseries—vowing to return them the following week when I received my allowance, and promising myself 1 would sink this low but once, just once, in this one foolishly desperate, miserably self-conscious, scary moment of self-abasement.
             Or if I won on my first try, then, of course, I would return the remainder immediately, perhaps with a bit of profit from my ten spot, which I'd break right away to buy a sack of swag, saving nine bucks—say—for an otherwise sugarless stretch of life which circumstances always threatened to inflict on me like the Almanac did the world with foul weather; and maybe I’d upgrade my wrapper collection, because finances had kept me lately in that plain slow lane called "penny candy,” and I’d begun stuffing used wads of gum back in their original jackets instead of sticking the chewage beneath the seat of my neighbor’s chair.
             But it wasn’t long, and no surprise, before 1 was slipping in to steal a penny—first a few—finally a fistful from the pile, scooting out before my shadow could fall on the shag, trying to fill in the holes in my allowance, which more and more resembled the punchboard after I’d begun hitting the nickel wishes.
          Who would miss a few pennies taken from a heap this huge? That’s what I believed in the beginning, but the dwindle was more rapid than I could bear to calculate, and I became reckless rather than cautious as the bottom of the box came into view and the shiny coppers I had avoided taking (as though I were stealing only the “bad” pennies nobody wanted anyway) began to gleam in the faint light like an advertisement for the absence of their dingy companions. 1 was even angry that my parents hadn't replenished the pot as rapidly as I was depleting it, for that had been an early dream: of a steady state for the pile, and consequently a constant supply for me of loose change.
          My allowance, the contents of the penny box, a dime I found on the sidewalk, a few cents retrieved from bottle deposits, three small loans obtained from pals, the cut-rate sale of a cap gun (with nary a wink of good will in exchange, nor a winner, nor a moment of solace for my sweetneedy tooth): each disappeared behind the counter of the candy store, into Mom and Pop’s hoard, who had to know that such gambling devices were illegal, that selling chances to a minor was prohibited, and who had to have guessed what I was very likely up to in order to obtain my rather copious supply of funds; yet why should they suddenly choke upon scruple when they were in the business of corrupting children, and leading them on from penny jujubes to toffee bars, from sodas to shakes, and bags to boxes? They were said to traffic in condoms and dirty comic books, cigarettes and even schnapps. My parents said once they were Jews from Silesia. In any case, they belonged, in spirit, to that group of merchants who sold overpriced schlock in the slums. I observed the slyly indifferent, watchfully neutral way they peddled their wares, and 1 knew well they wouldn t have offered the devil a spilled bag of caramel corn to save my soul, let alone slow by a second my profitable drop into their darkness.
          1 had to call a halt. I had to. My plan was: I would wait until the pot had magically brewed its potion once again, and thus avoid discovery. My plan was that in future I would frugally, though continuously, skim, achieving my dream in spite of an erratic economy. 1 would simply have to pause now and then to breathe between borrowings, and live on “interest.’’
          And I did stop, slipping into their bedroom only occasionally to have a look at the replenishment level, which, to my dismay, did not appear to rise at all. 1 suffered several days of sobriety before whisking in one afternoon after school to check the supply. My fathers first words frightened me as I have never been frightened since, and I let the lid fall with what might have seemed a thock if 1 hadn t heard it like a pistol shot. Low, dry, slow, relentlessly it came like blows against my rigid back. I hadn’t the courage to turn to the bed where my father must have been lying (not in wait, I never supposed, but uncharacteristically resting). 1 must have slid right by him, my eyes fixed on my image in the mirror
           and on that fatal corner of the dressing table. Low, dry, slowly formed, the pronouncement came, my father’s voice full of pause and consideration, like maybe a judge s, with a kind of penal finality even in midsentence, midphrase, and unlike the rather pell-mell stridency of his customary dress-me-downs and more commonplace curse-outs, those scornful accounts of my character which always included disclaimers of responsibility for my failures, for my laziness (not a whiff in his family), my shiftiness (in contrast to the stand-up nature of the relatives around me), my myth-making, my downright lying (whose cause could not be anywhere discerned), my obstinacy too, and my prolonged stretches of pout, sulk, and preoccupied silence which 1 seemed to take an inordinate joy in inflicting upon my undeserving family, who had always done their level best
                            ... and all the rest...
                            fed me, washed me, made sure I was dressed,
                            repaired what I broke, cleaned what I messed
                            ... and all the rest...
                            so I could live like someone blessed,
                            and bow my head at God’s request
                            ... and all the rest...
                            but I had fouled my own sweet nest,
                            and cracked the hearts in their fair chests
                            ... and all the rest...
                            so they would treat me, henceforth, as a guest
                            until such time as I went west
                            ... and all the rest...
                            to seek my scuzzy fortune or confessed
                            my crimes, with remade mind, and soul distressed
                            ... and all the rest...
                            whereupon, with sins redressed,
                            they might—of my presence—make the best:
           charges which were rapidly related, as if memorized, and hurled headlong at my head, between my eyes, as 1 always thought, causing my knees to bend a bit each time as if to duck, though ritually, a shower of stones. Perhaps his words were low and dry because his mouth was a well of dust like mine. Certainly they were rough as if purposely coarsened before they came out, and they felt like a file were being drawn across my inner ear.
              So ... so son . . . you have taken up stealing ... at which you seem to be no better than you are at anything else . . . not just from your chums? your friend, Fred? what was it? the library’s overdue box? . . . now you are stealing from
      me . . . you are stealing from your father. . . you are stealing from your mother... no less . . . you must be a stranger... a thief from the street who’s come to take cash . . . maybe food? no? . . . maybe clothes? ... to trash things ... to break trust.
         So . . . son . . . you’ve come here for money . . . come in here ... for pennies . . . what is it you want you couldn’t ask your mother for? you couldn’t ask me? . . . your life lacks so much? . . . petty, these pennies . . . paltry little amounts, right? but the principle is the same . . . they make you just as much a thief... so ... to sneak about. . . deceive ... to steal from your mother’s vanity ... no less . . . that, 1 wouldn’t have believed ... on the basis of the past, your behavior at school, your lying, your sulks, all the rest ... on that basis, I’d believe much . . . but from your mother’s room? to steal? . . . that way throw your life away.
         Like Arkansas. That's why it stayed in my mind. Because of what my father said. I would be—for good—for all the lint it brought me—the missing piece.
         What had I wanted, he wondered, that these few pennies would buy? We would never know, he supposed, how much I had taken. Had I a hoard of my own somewhere nearby, or had I spent them, blown every penny, one at a time, like snot from my nose?
         Without thinking, I confessed to the lesser crime. I had spent the money on candy, I said. You stole these pennies for what? for that? Gumballs and gum-drops, for sweets, I said. On sweets.
         When my father ransacked my room, and discovered my collection of candy wrappers, he believed me. It was a silly enough reason. After all, I was only nine or ten. Sure. Why not? That way throw my life away. At ten.
         For sweets.
        OUTCAST ON THE MOUNTAINS OF THE HEART
                  Aunts
         Everybody has aunts. Sisters circling your parents like thoughtful birds. Of course, when you are a kid, you don’t see them like that. You see Mrs. Santa
            Claus. Or Miss Awfully Jolly. The Aunt I got to know best (one of my mother’s sisters) simply became my Aunt, as if she were the whole hill, and I awaited her appearance, whenever it was (for if the rails adults ran on were mysterious, their schedules were even more so), with an anticipation pleasantly secure in what it might expect; for she always carried a great black purse from which candies were, with much teasing, extracted, occasionally a toy—small things, simple but comforting—signs of her remembrance and her favor. So Auntie was always greeted with gaiety when she came through our door in a bustle of bags, alleging that this time her handbag was empty, insisting that her gifts were nothing at all, pleading unimportance for both purse and person, laughing, though nervously, every ill off—her cuts had healed, her flu was fine— finding a place for her hat and coat, a trivial task but never easy, removing with patience and incompetence such things as a rubber or galosh, shopping bag by her as though to steady her stance, panting a bit because of a climb, or an icy step, or a wind which was always unseasonable, I remember, producing an unexpected buffet, a draft deviously aimed, nefarious in intention, puffed firmly in the face.
              Whenever we went back to Grand, I saw her. Among the sibs, she was the unmarried one, a little dumpy in the hips even then, though to kids such things are scarcely noticed and count for nothing. She had the heart-shaped face of the family, the shy smile, the almost private chuckle, a very light limp whose cause was never known and whose character was never questioned, though later in her life it grew more pronounced until she seemed to rock when she walked. She did secretarial work and had studied shorthand, a skill which left me incredulous; its curls and dots and loops and slashes were signs that said “let’s pretend,” hence I could not take their claim to significance seriously, while, at the same time, they suggested mysteries to me and the concealments which codes and ciphers could create, so they were a major player in my imagination. In addition to ruled pads of paper and bundles of sharpened pencils bound by wide red rubber bands, my aunt had a gray-brown book called The Gregg Shorthand System (something like that), which 1 used to hold in my hand just to heft it, and open only to open, the fine lines on the glossy white pages like souvenir hair, characters at which 1 stared as though they were living creatures. 1 could have been studying the Koran.
              Although the arcane nature of her work impressed me, I had no idea what ‘shorthand’ itself meant. The word was a puzzle. I understood what it was to have a short circuit or to be short-handed or short with people or short of funds, and later 1 would myself suffer short-arm inspections, but if it weren’t at the end of a withered arm, what sort of hand was it? Longhand, I finally learned, was long because every sentence was supposed to contain all its words
       (that seemed reasonable), and each word was to be fully spelled, and all the letters properly made, while shorthand was like a short cut, its curviiinears symbolizing entire syllables, frequently used words, epistolary conventions, ab-brevs., contractions, bodies of sound, paths across vacant lots, openings in fences, back streets.
         You spoke into a pencil. The pencil then took your words away and hid them inside Gregg’s flagrantly gallivanting lines. Soon they were locked up inside a system, and only through the good will and skill of the stenographer could you get them off those helpful hooks and out of those squiggles again. Quietly, modestly, efficiently, shorthand took possession of your mind—not by understanding what you’d said, or by caring to know, but simply by conserving it, keeping it brand-new, a thought uttered yet unused, like a tie which hasn’t known a knot. It was a process which suited my aunt to a T. It expressed her essence. She specialized in skipping steps, too, in falling short, in incompletes, in not quite making do. Eventually, she would draw around a great part of my family life her unobtrusively constraining and secret lines.
         Auntie was the single sister, so it was she who was wedded to her mother's— my granny's—care, and accompanied Granny when she went to visit her various children, staying for a time with her eldest son, Walter, then for a period with her middle daughter, Sophie, and so on, finding a new job, too, each time the burden of sheltering mother was shifted from one family to another, since everyone lived in a different state as well as another town. Granny was truly elderly. She had disposed of most of her flesh: on her breasts, her hips, her cheeks, her thighs; she had lost her hearing and much of her sight; her hair lay like a thin mist above a head where only bone shone; all of her English was gone, and a lot of her German; she seemed to me covered in scrawly blue lines and arbitrary wrinkles; and her back was humped and bent like something dried.
         With the help of Auntie and a cane, she moved like a large light insect through the house, skinny as the skeleton she’d be buried as, scarcely touching anything, even the floor. She never complained. She said “ja” a lot and nodded too, as if a nod were a necessary piece of punctuation. She crocheted, drawing together many things whose dyes were dubious, and we all pretended to need and admire what came out of the almost automatic motion of her needles and her hands. They swallowed many a skein of yarn. Occasionally, on account of her eyes, Gran would skip a step or knot some threads or tangle her knitting, and Auntie would intervene, though she couldn’t stick a needle through a muffin, picking at confusions with her stubby, sensible stenograph hands, damaging the damage, clucking over her ineptitude.
         The day came when Auntie and Granny, bag and baggage, stepped down from the train for that lengthy stay which was our turn to shoulder, though it
           seemed quite a treat to me: to have the candy lady living in our own house, going off to work every day but regularly returning with little rolls of toffee or something curious from the office, yellow pencils on which had been printed strange names—the Chester Chair and Office Supply Company—or calendars the size of playing cards, with an entire year, official holidays, and all the weights and measures squeezed on one shiny side, or sometimes labels and stickers and clips of all kinds, as well as souvenirs in dubious taste, the gift of drummers from the plumbing companies, a miniature outhouse, I remember, fashioned from pretend bark, which was supposed to serve as an ashtray, and whose door had a moon the shape of a slice of cantaloupe cut into it.
             The things that recollect us. Historians should keep our vagrant habits in mind, for, on the whole, we don’t remember the crowning of kings or financial panics—whatever they count as history—but tacky key rings made of building products instead, laminated four-leaf clovers and cellophane sacks whose interiors marshmallows have powdered, jars containing jellybeans, balsa planes with their wings chipped where they’d struck trees, or rolls of bright red yarn, ripe as fruit, a darning egg, cricket clicker, or knitting needles with long amber handles. I remember that when Granny and Auntie crept down the steps of the train, leaning lightly on one another and on the arm of the conductor, they were wearing what seemed to me were identical, glassily polished, black shoes pulled on over white lisle socks; shoes, socks, and laces, motionless for a moment on the top step, those scintillating toes at the level of my very wide eyes, arriving—what a surprise, shoes like that, coming into one’s consciousness— arriving as promised from afar, but arriving strangely there, on a metal step, four foreign feet waiting for collection in our car, and—what an astonishing thing—shoes soon to be found standing on the same rug over which my armies marched and 1 spread the Sunday funnies.
             There was a trunk to follow. It was made of heavy cardboard covered in thin sheets of black metal, shiny like the shoes too, with a hasp which kept its secrets, and hinges as yellow as gold. The spare room was no longer a spare, but where a life would lie for years as though wrapped in transparent tissue. The bathroom and the breakfast nook grew crowded, doubled its soaps, took on toast. But Granny was exotic—it was like owning your own mummy, my friends were fascinated—while Auntie made fudge sometimes on Sundays, or popped corn, luring my loyalty as the settlers had the natives, buying my trust with little gifts and a refusal to interfere in my life which 1 found wholly appropriate for someone presumably living on the family’s fringe.
             Granny had come to visit, and Auntie had come with Granny, nurse with patient. 1 never thought about it, then, but when my father went off to the job he hated, and Auntie went off to the one she endured, and when I went off to
      school in the morning, it was my mother who was left at home to look after, care for, and tend. Meanwhile, Auntie and Granny settled in.
         They slept in that one spare room with its single closet, small front-facing window, and an attic stair which broke through the wall like an afterthought. Now 1 can bear to wonder what it was like to sleep in the same bed with your emaciated mother—how many years was it? more than a few—watching your own death like a coming attraction; to wonder what it was like to bathe her, too, roll her over later when she grew that weak, steady her down the stairs at first and feed her finally, when she would eat only enough to exasperate everybody, like a sip of existence herself, until, one morning, my aunt said, “She’s dead,” in the tone of something long known, in a voice which showed neither sorrow nor relief, since Gran had returned to the ghost of her husband, to Germany, and spoke a language now her daughters didn’t understand, and had memories they couldn’t share, back before they were born and waiting their surrection.
         It must have taken its toll, that decade of Auntie looking after Gran, of Gran being auntied, a tour of duty which had shaped them both and routined their relation into wordlessness before either had come to stay with us. Perhaps the prospect of such service had sealed my aunt’s sex the way a serious letter is with wax—not to be opened except, and so on—since I imagine it was shut even during the years when she was girlish still, and had worn those sailorette outfits, swung a tennis racquet, and looked cute in college. It never occurred to me that she'd ever been other than what she was, or that she wouldn’t remain that way like a stair rail whose function was to stand firmly upright as I passed, protecting and sustaining my climb. Grand wasn’t a great place to make a marital choice, and maybe Auntie had sensed that, had refused to let a hayseed seed her. Certainly neither of her sisters made out well enough to cause Auntie any envy, although her own life—a life lived alone, even when alongside Gran, and carried on in other people’s houses, in spare rooms like ours—was no great shakes or occasion for pride, but, it seemed to me, though it sought peace at the expense of passion, and preferred anything level to any slope, was still built of pure boredom, and passed in abundant numbness.
         My aunt was not a bell, silent until struck. She was not a bell at all, to ring when rung. She was absorbent, resilient as the wind, as persistently uncatch-able as a handful of the sea. She kept her own counsel. Under lock and key. If she had opinions she never offered them, and the decisions she had to make were announced only when necessary and couched in careful negatives: she didn't think she’d mind not having refused that job; perhaps the weather didn’t wholly prohibit a picnic; she didn’t hate the dress she'd bought although she’d bought it because it was on sale. She seemed to back toward her purposes as if their denial were royal; but acknowledging the possession of any aims at all
           was to be avoided if possible. Mostly, if a picnic weren’t out of the question, she would go about preparing for it. That’s how you were to understand her interest; yet if questioned, she’d deny the desire with a deprecating chuckle, and admit only to getting ready just in case you had, yourself, a yen. Nor did you have to eat the cake she’d baked, but here it was, nevertheless, not her favorite sort certainly, but only what the larder made possible, though fortunately of so few ingredients as not to lower the stock by any appreciable amount, after all, who’d miss such negligible items; however, in case you really didn’t want any, the piece she'd cut for you, you’d notice, was small, the plate mostly made of the accompanying ice cream which you could eat or not because now you had a choice, and the coffee was fresh, she’d brewed a small pot, no fuss involved, still it went well with this kind of cake, she’d read, and complemented the cool of the French vanilla, though you couldn’t really believe books or papers, the things they said, besides, if you didn’t want seconds, who would care, but if you did, why then it was there. By your elbow. Every layer waiting as though in a long line. Her overbearing deference drove my dad crazy.
             Aunt had no preferences. Aunt was a guest, grateful, without requirements, adaptable, no one to worry over or accommodate—cup in its cupboard, spoon in a drawer—yet she hoped she was sometimes useful, and not always unwanted. Her characteristic response to any suggestion was, It makes no never mind to me. In short, she went along. When she went along. She had no plans, had formed no expectations, none she announced anyway, so no one was supposed to feel bound by what she might have intended, nor did she ever have to seem to sacrifice or bend. However, her secrecy was as limiting as a steel fence, her passivity as daunting as a cliff. How could you move if you didn’t know the location of the edge? It drove my dad mad. Aunt spoke less than the grave: never about money, though she paid board and room for Gran and herself, and liked to surprise you with little gifts; never about vacations, though she always had two weeks, and usually went along on our car trips; never about hopes, fears, health, happiness, friends from work, never of dreams about tomorrow or next year; never about special pleasures, hobbies, interests, or concerns. If there were any delights in her life, any anxieties, any loves, they were locked away out of reach like whatever was still in her trunk.
             Say, Auntie, are you coming to the movies with us? Well, she didn’t know, what was playing? Ah. Was that the one with Crosby? Oh. She didn’t know. She’d see. And so would we. Because when we got ourselves ready to leave she’d be standing by the door in a big coat hung with bags, waiting. Then when Gran got so frail she couldn't be left alone for more than a moment, Aunt would say she didn’t want to see that movie, didn’t have time, or, once in a while, to our surprise, she’d say she’d already seen it, but 1 never heard her de-
      clare that she’d better stay home with Gran, or insist that she was needed, or point out that somebody had to look after mother. All the same, we knew the reason, so my mom would offer, and Aunt would refuse, and everyone would stay by the door for a while to insist and decline, until my dad and 1 would grow impatient, whereupon he and 1 would get in the car and he’d pretend to drive away by revving the engine, which would encourage my mother to put an end to the exasperating ritual, to shut the door on my aunt’s soft faint forgiving face. It drove my dad nuts.
        Never live with sisters, he said. I said I wouldn’t. Sooner a snake of any species than a relative of any kind. I understood. These two, for god’s sake, had inaudible squabbles. So I’d heard. They hated one another like Croats and Serbs, but couldn’t admit it. Was that so? They did these things to dismay their aged mother. Did what things? Threw out one another’s leftovers, for instance. Wore one another’s hose. He had drawn up a lengthy list of tally and retaliation. Disheveled one another’s piles of papers. It went way back, predated dad, he said, old feud, the Hats and Coys had nothing on these sisters. Had I noticed how they fought to be the last through a door? how they never said good night? picked at one another’s pastries? opened one another’s letters? never accepted a nut or a piece of candy from a sister’s hand? never wore or read or ate a gift, accepted the object but rejected its use? preferred opposites in films and radio shows? disliked different Andrews sisters? 1 hadn’t. Well. God. Take a gander. Get a grip. God. It drove him into conniptions.
        Gran was all right. A good soul. She deserved. But her kids, all five, would I look at them? Where should I look, I wondered (not aloud), in the family album? Both boys were drunks and had married nags. Dad didn't know whether there was a causal connection. The other sister was all bottom like a Russian doll, did I know the kind? They drove him bonkers. Mules the Muh-lenbergs were, especially Auntie. She drove him around the bend. Well, 1 could agree with him about that last. She wasn’t simply stubborn in her core, deep down; she was stubborn from pip and pulp to stem and skin; she was stubborn in the pigment of her eyes, in her "go ahead” gaze: Do what you want, I won’t argue, 1 won’t resist, but I won’t change. She was stubborn in the way she maintained her privacy. It drove us both bananas. She was there in our house, very there, but her self was secret. See-cret, he said slowly, as if savoring the thought, as if it were—the word—some sort of solution. See-crete. That’s it. He was comforted, and raised his aching arms to form a hallelujah. Her secretions, my father said with a feeling and a fervor whose foundation continued to escape me, her secretions drive me dizzy.
        There wasn’t any place in Gran and Auntie’s little lodging for the shiny black steamer trunk, so it was elevated to the attic. 1 had stored a few large old toys
           up there—a cardboard castle, 1 remember, a table for a train—so occasionally I’d find an excuse to squeeze past the dresser and the bed in their room to reach the stairs and the attic's special dusty gloom. The trunk had a solemnity, a self-importance, which impressed me. It must contain treasures, mysterious maps, enigmatic objects. Perhaps it was full of Gran’s memories, souvenirs of her old-country past, and its lid hinged onto history. It looked locked, so I assumed it was. Naturally, with valuable contents, it would be. Months passed before I even tried the hasp, which flipped back as if sprung, and I lifted the lid, and looked in on nothing—unoccupied darkness. The trunk held an appreciable volume of disappointment. That was all.
             The hollow, though, the hollow it held, eventually became its treasure for me; it was the mystifying object whose essence, if discovered, would be a key to something grand, something special, something crucial. It was the woman in black of the movies. It was the mysterious black map of Africa. It was the morose black Falcon. I would think of it up there, not the trunk but the pure space its interior defined, waiting to be brought to life, yes, possibly, creepily, by a kiss. To be occupied. As if it were the body of a being, waiting, waiting ages, eons, to be souled.
             Kid’s game, of course. Kid’s dream. Then I would imagine it was a true space suit, a suit I’d don, the kind of costume which transformed its wearer into a creature of the stars, powerful in some fresh way hitherto unconceived; perhaps it would render me invisible when I wore it, make of me a space as well, and maybe it held many that way, enveloping others, since none of us would any longer bulk but be as Being was possibly meant to be, and in so being be what I would later realize was the philosopher’s concept of pure extension, res extensa; yes, that’s how I felt about it, not knowing the words, but, just the same, it would be magical indeed to be there, being Being without being this or that (writing about it now, I realize, makes my mind and memory German), disappearing into dark space, no, not into the power of the stars (wrong about that, though a natural error), but into an inner rather than an outer emptiness; yes, that’s how I felt about it, having no metaphysics, simply sensing it as exceeding any symbol of inwardness, the dark bowl your brain shapes when you close your eyes, or the space where all the notes of music flare and sounds speed from place to place as swiftly as thought; yes, though then 1 couldn’t have made the comparison—seen it as the ultimate container of consciousness— yet even the word trunk’ led me instinctively toward the truth, suggesting as it did a torso, a pair of lungs, the vital fluid of the soul, some such, before 1 had the terms I could dispose in any adequate way to describe it: Gran and Auntie’s steamer trunk had borne into our house the character of consciousness itself, empty, of course, thus universal, thus potential, like that of the un-
      born, or a monster without the electricity of life, or the maiden asleep, waiting to be energized, lived in, filled, a volume; yes, no wonder it ought not to be let out, diluted by things already made, felt, thought, imagined, desired—dragged about, disgraced, defiled, deformed—for it was inwardness without anything in it, without any outside having crept like a wounded animal into its den to hide, perhaps to heal there, a world of material mess and misery, not yet royally imagined, not yet made more than merely into mind.
        The day itself was dark—gray with clouds—when I lifted a leg and was half inside, an excitement in me which sex would never succeed in achieving, holding the edges of the trunk with my hands to lift my right leg next, but leaning back, my arms, my grip, behind me, the leg coming up as if to kick, and crossing above the latch, lowering itself into the space where I now sank and sat, tubbed; yes, rubadubbed of reality, 1 rested, struggling to control my breathing, now holding my knees near my chest, and bowing my head as though, with this gesture, I could drop my self—what? my soul with my body?—below the trunk’s upper edge; yes, 1 wanted that immersion, I didn’t care simply to conceive it, I desired that depth, so I thought I'd just lower the lid for a moment to get the full feeling of that emptiness I’d entered, that region meant only for realization, but 1 heard a little click go lightly off like a gunshot and my head banged the top so hard my neck was cricked, I was caught by my own knees, saw, if not stars, searing light, and shuddered simultaneously, forcing my arms up against the firmly latched conclusion of my foolish dreams. 1 had killed myself. I wasn’t cabined, cribbed. I was coffined. I’d be buried in my box of being. What a joke had been played on me!
        If pure Being was pure panic, I knew what pure Being was. I had no time to imagine how I’d smother. I had nothing in my mind but "out!" Yet there was an instant after my initial moment of terror, equally brief, in which I did feel the stillness of the undisturbed, during which I grasped the grid on which the mind lay, and saw, otherwise unmarked, the space in which the imagination moved, guided by feeling, fueled by desire; yes, and I gulped a great gulp, the remainder of my air, and banged the side of the trunk with the sides of my arms, whammed them against it, ready to shout, to scream and be embarrassed about it later, whammed the side and headed the lid, headed and whammed, when suddenly the lock in the latch popped, and the latch flew back from its whamslammed side of the trunk, and my head went through, it seemed, every roof, whew . . . aaah, 1 eloquently said, or some such low-volumed howl, when I rose out of the box, and oooh, eloquently again, when I fell back inside and the lid returned to close me. My arms were well up now, though, and I grabbed my tub’s edge and rolled ungracefully out, scraping a lot of skin even through my clothes, shit, out of there, sliding, wiping dust up from the attic floor like
            some mop, god, so, I’m on my knees, on my feet, down steps, through the spare room’s room, hallward bound, my own raum, my own bed, facedown, blubbering, a stupid scared shit for sure, but full now of a more manageable fright, and overcome by a weakness which made me feel all in ... all in ... in fact, as I had been.
               Aunt did things for people they didn't quite want done. She ironed our handkerchiefs into folded squares; she tied the ends of our freshly washed socks into knots; she fed you snacks more frequently than your greed and nerves would have chosen by themselves; she saved stories from the newspapers you had passed over purposely; she remembered how much you had liked peanut butter ice cream the first time you had it (although her memory wasn’t your memory, which was of a distinctly grungy tongue and cleavy mouth); she reminded you of unpleasant appointments; she’d clean half of a copper-bottomed pan, store leftovers in unlikely dishes, and pick up after you, but only while you watched; she raked the yard, which got me in trouble with my old man; she bought too many gooey pies and layer cakes, which got mom in trouble with dad, since he hated both sweet desserts and waste, and, in addition, Aunt; she wiped dry the dishes I washed without getting rid of the soap; and she brought home jigsaw puzzles said to be cut in one thousand minuscule pieces, each with apparently identical heads and hollows, slopes, bumps, and grinds, and waited for us to turn them over and spread them out before saying she was sleepy and would see us all in the morning.
               She would unwrap the last caramel in the dish and then, with a conspiratorial smile, present it to you covered with her fingerprints.
               After volunteering, then persisting over our heartfelt objections, and furthermore refusing all assistance, Aunt would take all day to do dinner, moving from one emergency to another like an ambulance, while dirtying every dish, pot, spoon, and pan, spilling on the stove and spattering the countertop, cutting, staining, scalding herself like a stereotypical male, only to declare herself finally too tired to eat and only able in her apron to stare at her plate while we d pick at our, after all, simple fare, and pretend to converse.
               I think my Aunt knew that, except for her fudge, I hated her food. 1 know she knew I’d be expected to clean up. So 1 took her dinner preparations to be acts of aggression undertaken against me. I wondered what I’d done. 1 wondered how 1 could get even.
               Offices where my Aunt worked—well, they loved her. She was always on time, rarely missed a day, never complained, was a source of little tidbits and tasties, remembered birthdays and so forth with cards, seemed cheerfully ready to work overtime, even on Saturdays and during inventory, listened to hard-luck stories from the other help and gladly subbed for them when they
      were sick: in sum, in every hallowed business way proved her worth many times over. Yet give Aunt a few faithful years, and only she would be able to find an invoice, locate a shipment, repair an error, expedite an order, know where absolutely anything was. By then, she would have installed her own system, and the work of the firm would have to pass through her in order to be complete. In all modesty, I’m sure she’d say she was only the small intestine of the corporate body. As was her way, Aunt had taken down all the company’s operations in her unreadable, unreachable shorthand. Locked in her scheme of placement and relation, the affairs of the business—a wholesale office supply in the most signal instance—were beyond anyone else’s reach and reckoning.
        Which the owners would eventually realize, though it took years to face the cruel truth that they were caught in Auntie’s coils. At first, they would simply and sympathetically attempt to loosen her grip, because, after all, the condition was a natural consequence of her devoted service, and not the result of malice or ineptitude. But Auntie would turn Aunt in such circumstances, grow more secretive, more silent, slow every request to a crawl, divert every directive, undermine every order, resist reorganization by becoming increasingly uncooperative, and when management grew insistent, respond by shutting down her system as though she were closing a valve, and reducing the firm’s performance to the final few shakes of an embarrassed piss.
        I particularly remember the day her office supply firm fired her. As luck would have it, 1 was home from school with a somewhat imaginary cold. She appeared at noon, a wholly unusual break in routine, and so unresponsive I knew something serious had happened. She usually got a lift, since she didn’t drive, but this time she arrived in a cab, was laden with shopping bags I offered to bring in, assistance which was brusquely refused. I suggested some tomato soup which I was heating for my lunch. Wearing a grimly noncommittal look, Aunt stumbled up the stairs, bags at the end of both hands, each heaped with mysterious stuff. Crackers? cheese? a bit of ham? I was feeling better by the minute. Her stocky body spoke only of persistence. Gran had died the year before, but I still wondered where Auntie would stash all that—whatever it was—she was lugging up to her room.
        There was not a word out of her, ever, not in answer to my mom or dad, certainly not in answer to me. I’m making a change, said she, but that was announced to a neighbor whom she spoke to in the yard. The outhouse ashtray disappeared, and would no longer embarrass its downstairs table. In the same swift way also vanished all the copies of a builder’s magazine which used to lie uselessly about, and pads of her office paper that did telephone duty. Oh yes. A pen and pencil set bearing the name of a carpet company in supposed gold— gone. Who cared? Long out of lead and ink.
              It wasn't many days before she had another job, real estate this time, even an improvement, fewer hours, slicker paper in the pads she replaced by the phone, cardboard houses you could put together by sticking tabs in slots, better quality of candy, which signified the presence of a superior drugstore nearby, fewer klutzy advertisers’ favors, but now she had to go to and from work on the bus. I imagine my Aunt received excellent references. Her employers would be anxious to be rid of her, yet they would feel guilty, too, for she had served them well—wouldn't they have to think?—over many years, unstintingly, without complaint; moreover-—wouldn’t they have to believer—she had become impossible by inadvertence, not by design, by dint of her devotion. Yes, that discomfort would produce, 1 thought, a lot of praise. So in no time Aunt was well placed and apparently comfortable in her new position, although now she had a three-block walk from the bus, and would be less inclined to bring home heavies, bulkies, ashtrays disguised as outhouses, samples of glass brick.
              It was Christmas, though, when my Aunt came into her own, when she played Auntie to the hilt—Santa Auntie, my father said in some disgust, she drove him crazy—because the secular side of that holiday, its entire commercial taint, its petty bad taste, its obligatory cheer, its inherently hypocritical character, suited her, put her in red flannel, grew her a beard, but above all, gave her leave and license: to do everybody in with dinkies and gimcracks, to cheapskate her way to victory in the Christmas present competition.
              Out of step as she was, Auntie was nevertheless a real woman of the future, because she believed in the power of the package, in the force of sheer amounts, in glitz and glitter, of which there could not be too much. The Christmas tree, which went up early, and on which she did not hang a single geegaw herself, groaned from the weight of slivers of shiny lead foil she forced us to drape on it, from great green blue red silver ornamental balls, skeins of tarnished gold rope, strings of multicolored lights whose paint had flaked, candy canes stiff in their staleness, little papier-mache dolls whose painted paper faces grinned demonic grins, on and on, as if they’d seen something permanently silly, a few heirlooms, too, from Gran’s Tannenbaum, lost among the borne-down boughs, drowned in trinkets from Kresge and Woolworth; then dingy stars and tissue paper angels whose bodies were full of jellybeans and hard Christmas candy, which had to be thrust back within the branches because of their weight, clip-on birds who belonged in a jungle, glitter domes through whose celluloid windows you could almost see what might be generously called ‘‘a snow scene,” little dangling doodads of no known species, like the rest of the tree's decorations, saved from year to year with a parsirfiony unknown to medieval monks, and reamassed, and reapplied, each Christmas, to the tree as if it were Christ on His Cross and they were the nails, short and small
       like brads, perhaps (and, like stapling the moon to the sky, it would take a few); until it stood there, our Christmas tree, once more a mountain of kitehykoo, a-blight with litter and gloss, resplendent with frost dust, topped by the holy star itself, the whole shebang producing a generous shimmer which conferred upon all who came within the radius of its radiance its cut-rate blessing.
         Beneath this tribute to Christmases past, a piece of green felt was—not exactly wrapped, nor laid—say, swirled; then upon its scarfy sward were placed pieces which belonged to a creche the way the hotels of Monopoly belonged to the game: a camel, I remember, larger than a palm, some real straw and a cow from one of Auntie's former occupations which said "Holsum" on the side we turned to the wall, a little rabbi-looking fellow, the first 1 ever saw, and a naked baby on its back, probably bawling because it had no sex.
         This tender scene was scarcely incompleted before the war of the gifts began: first Aunt, with a small elegantly wrapped present which appeared to have been stolen from Van Cleef and Arpels, then my mom, with a tie box done in green Christmas tissue and stickered with red bows; then Aunt, with a tube done in black like a diploma, and enlivened by a white ribbon wound around it in a slant pattern borrowed from a barber’s pole, followed by my mom with another flat package, scarf or hankie likely, this one in red tissue paper dotted with lots of stick-on silver stars; then Aunt with a big square one in heavy purple stock whose crisply folded ends were sealed with yellow gauze fluffed to resemble a rose, and mom, who responded with a shoe box enveloped in of course white tissue whose lid had been topped by a large green perfectly toothed tree lit with smears of crayon; then Aunt again, this time with two dainty ring boxes, one blue, one pink, glued to the ends of a tongue depressor, while my mom weighed in with a ball bound in waxy red and noosed at the neck by red string, which one would say concealed popcorn on account of the runny irregularities of its slopes; however, these treasures were only the beginning, because each evening for two weeks, more packages would appear, in competing pairs, to cover up the creche, if it was ever there, to blot the baize, if it had once been swirled about the trunk with a bit of flair, and to flop out onto the floor around the tree in an increasingly encroaching ring of wealth and generosity: gifts wrapped in papers with metallic sheens, or relieved by embossments or by messages of love and entreaty like Peace on Earth and Joy to the World, papers printed with gay scenes—coaches driven by grinning men in high hats, sleighs pulled down lanes of snow by horses hung with silver bells, cheery-faced Santas lugging bursting bags, beery-cheeked carolers, socks stuffed with sticks of peppermint, skies filled with melting snow-shaped stars, wise men decked out in turbans and festooned with gems, a few sheets full of beach balls in big bright colors meant for a baby but made, here, to do for another day, as I always felt the blue rabbits
            had done, hopping over from Easter; and there were gifts stickered to a faretheewell with Prancer and Vixen, with St. Nick in postures of welcome and jollity, Snow White and all her dwarfs, why not? Christmas seals advertising tuberculosis, gum-backed wreaths, boughs, berries, snow-covered cottages, mailboxes with welcoming red ribbons, stickers stuck to stickers, as well as assorted gnomes, candles, elves, and sugared cookies; tags too, glued on, tied with string, printed with scenes reminiscent of the good old days, gifts both large small medium and shapeless, bedizened like whores, got up like clowns, suggestive, seductive, with built-in rattles, or capable of other mysterious sounds, some skinny as pencils, or big enough to be a bike, finally spilling up instead of over, sitting about on the sideboard in the dining room, encircling a blue mirror flocked with talc and afloat with swans.
              They would take hours to open, this plethora of presents, since we approached them like dishes, one at a time, and opened them carefully, with spatulas and scissors, because as many wrappings as possible would be sat on and saved, flattened, folded, and put away for use on another day, possibly another Christmas when Aunt would even iron some, smooth them into newness, but possibly, depending on the ambiguities of color and design, employ them to wrap an office birthday present, or a wedding gift or christening rattle (white would always do); and the department store boxes, too, would be reused, so you could never be sure what would be in them, certainly tie boxes rarely held ties and ring boxes never rings, while many were oatmeals made over, or other commercial containers, tobacco tins, egg cartons, or those for cigars, shoes, cigarettes, and candy.
              To look at this pile of packages (at “the loot” as it was called) one would think we were a family both rich and profligate, but, like everything else about us, that too would be an illusion. In the first place, the purchase of necessities was put off until Christmas, if possible, so many of these finely wrapped wonders would contain shoelaces, toothpaste, socks, underwear, shaving cream, and similar sundries; or they were goodies we habitually bought anyway, like peanut brittle which Auntie hauled home regularly in a little white sack, or cigarettes in a wreath-covered carton, although the holidays sometimes earned us a larger treat than usual, a row of candy bars or bundle of gum packs instead of singles; on top of that there were the so-called customary presents, and this quota was met half by office theft and half by hurt items on desperate sale— slightly soiled shirts, or a sweater an odd size, rummage remainders, samples you could get free by sending coupons through the mail; then occasionally Aunt would pass on to my mom (who was always angrily aware of it) a blouse or slip she'd received somewhere else and didn’t want, pink as a pair of wax lips perhaps, or a bit too big, too lacy, or too deeply cleaved.
        The wrappings which weren’t recycled from former service, but bought brand-new, were obtained at after-Christmas sales where prices were greatly reduced, strings of lights, too, and little glass balls as well as packages of ribbons. tags, stars, and other stickums. So our Christmases were reasonably economical, not to say cheap, although for Aunt they were certainly lots of work. And the rites were as slow and predictable as a glacier. I'd unlace a delicately done-up little froufrou to find a tin of black shoe polish. Ah, I’d exclaim. Just what I wanted. The worst of it was, it was what 1 wanted, but not wrapped the way it was wrapped, not hauled by a red-faced fatso down the sky across half the world and put under the tree to draw the eye and tease anticipation—not as the pretense of a gift I would be given at Christmas, which was matched by the pretense of my appreciation.
        My Aunt was the Princess of the Inappropriate Present. She knew 1 liked books, and that 1 read a lot of biography, so any history which came to hand, any life, if it was of Frances Willard, would do, and received her first-class Christmas treatment. She would buy my mom liquor-filled chocolates and my dad a subscription to a left-leaning magazine. She drove him ditzy But what lured Aunt most often into opening her purse were sales of perishables like boxed cookies, chocolate-covered cherries, cereals like Cream of Wheat, potato chips, dried fruit, mixed nuts, and 1 would find sacks of these items stored in the basement, a hedge against depression, drought, or other disaster. You never know, she'd insist, with her disarming chuckle. Just in case. For a rainy day. Having a little extra can’t hurt. A saver is like the savior. Dead as a door and full of nails, 1 didn’t say.
        Little by little, and with Aunt it was always that, she took over the laundry, the mending and ironing. Then it was she who plumped the pillows for my father's back, found his slippers where they’d hid under his chair, fetched American Legion magazine or The Saturday Evening Post, switched on his reading light as day became dusk, helped him into a warmer shirt, poured him fresh coffee when his ulcer allowed it, made certain his prescriptions didn’t run out. Little by little my mother lapsed into petulant whining and crying. Aunt suggested menus, drew up grocery lists, eventually shopped. Soon she was keeping all the household accounts, paying the bills, seeing about services: she had the furnace cleaned, a wooden ramp built for my father, the gutters checked, the windows washed. My mother more and more looked on, heaped in a chair like a pile of towels, while Aunt took hold of the movement of life in our house, such as it was.
        Now she bought the gifts my father gave my mother at Christmas, and those my mother gave my father, and those they both gave me—secondhand textbooks, mostly—as well as some presents the tags said they gave to Auntie her-
           self and also those from Santa to the entire family. She wrapped them all too, as fancily as ever, directed me during the crucifixion of the tree, and when Christmas morning came, and we had slowly painfully gathered, picked out our presents for us, held them under each appropriate nose, unwrapped the wrappings like a surgeon, modeled the gloves, held a sweater to its appointed chest, and helped the recipients say it was just what they wanted, gee, what a lovely color, exactly my size. She ate most of the candy, most of the Christmas dinner, and put away most of the presents too, the way she stored the boxes and the wrapping paper, for use another time, perhaps at a birthday, maybe at Easter, or when Christmas came again.
             1 learned to hate holidays, anything which seemed to call for the closing of the family fist. They were strange, these people, who listened to Jack Benny of an evening, each in their appointed perches, who perused newspapers and magazines without enthusiasm, sometimes putting a puzzle together, sometimes playing a game, but who mostly complained of one another and the world with a bitterness which had grown tame through repetition and the reduction of their energies. Three pools of pain, 1 would think, before 1 remembered where and what I was myself, also listening to Jack Benny, arguing about whether something he’d said was funny, hunting for a double-bumped straight edge which was mostly red—sure, I was puddle wonderful too. Is this a night for Lowell Thomas?
             The day came when I had to put mother and father in their different hospitals, and Auntie and 1 came face-to-face. The commitments had rattled her and skewed her schedule. She had nearly no one to manage. And I intended to escape her grip if 1 could, though it wasn’t easy. Father, before his final weakness, had begun complaining to me that Auntie was rich; she had all sorts of investment policies, he said, was a terrible tightwad about money, had never shared the burden of the household, and had squirreled away great sums over time, securing them in equity funds—the terminology was too much for me— and by the clever purchase of stock increasing her worth many times. How was 1 to know? More than this, my father felt that she was—well—stealing from him now that she had taken over his financial arrangements—his health insurance, his few stocks, his retirement fund—and sweetening her fruit with his sugar. 1 had no way to judge these allegations. Maybe Aunt had finally smoked my father loco. I knew it troubled him to have her handling his affairs, but there really was no help for it. That Aunt was a saver had become increasingly apparent—to a point past stereotype. In a basket hung behind the door to the basement, 1 found a ball made of strings in all kinds of lengths, materials, and colors, another of foils, similarly various, many torn from cigarette packs, and nearby a cigar box crammed with assorted rubber bands. At the foot
       of the basement stairs stood a table now piled with newspapers, magazines, and grocery sacks, folded neatly in several stacks and weighed down with Geographies. My Auntie had become a pack rat.
         Real proof of this arrived on that Saturday morning when [ found myself alone in the house. Aunt worked till noon and sometimes stayed downtown to shop. 1 hadn’t been in the attic in ages, and I was intensely curious about that bedroom I could now not cross, even to relieve a toy from its dusty third-floor confinement, for I felt myself too old to employ that excuse. Our bedroom doors had locks, but the keys had been lost long ago, so there was no way she could keep me from her secrets. Nothing but my embarrassment stood in the way and delayed my sortie for an hour while 1 felt foolish about my desires and castigated my vulgar curiosities.
         I had no idea what 1 would find, and, in a way, nothing is what I found. Empties would almost be the better word. At first, when 1 entered, the spare room resembled itself in a reassuring way. Bed, chest, chair, little table, its lamp and its frilly shade—each was in its customary place. Nor were the walls hung with anything new: the hand-carved and hand-painted Swiss scene in its tight wooden oval rimmed with something resembling animal horn was still there, and a photo of Gran with tinted cheeks, and one even of me, aged twelve, pink as a bedroom pillow.
         I hated that pork-faced picture.
         The attic stairs presented a different sight. They were heaped—each step— with packages and sacks, so many there was nowhere purchase for a foot, even the railing was obscured, the accumulations reached that high, and went solidly across from wall to wall, row after row, to make for a full house, not a seat empty, right to the uppermost balcony. 1 could guess, from some of the things which threatened to topple out of the sacks, that many were full of Christmas tree decorations; 1 could see the point of a large star, a bit of dirty silver rope, extension cord, roll of colored tissue paper—but the remainder bulged with mystery. There were walls and towers of boxes, too, in calm cream, gray, and off-white colors, as well as a few bright vulgar ones in Scotch plaid or Chinese red; typical sizes, too, the disappointing shape of a shirt carton, or a sock, tie, and hankie wallet, the more promising shoe box, and so on, ones you expect to find bathrobes folded in, or suits, disciplined by their cardboard inserts, sticking out over the treads, many with embossed and mottled and satin-slick surfaces, one or two with a diagonal slash of color across their faces, most of them fresh-looking, almost new, as if they had been allowed to see little of life, and had gone rather directly from package factory and department store to Auntie’s attic, for it was clearly hers now, the attic was, though I couldn’t really see beyond the landing.
             What was in these piles besides boxes? I felt like Alice, or someone similarly situated in a fairy tale, and it was with the sense l was committing a magical act that I took down several good-size containers and slipped off their tops. Of course. There was nothing in these boxes but box. Inside a square carton, the size appropriate for a basketball, was a blue cube right for a small hat, and inside that was a sturdy white one with a tabbed top suitable, say, for a drugstore clock, while, finally, in place of the missing timepiece, lay a small flat cotton-padded bracelet case containing, besides its soft stuffing, a forgotten Christmas tag: Best wishes, Bill; but 1 couldn't remember ever giving Auntie anything that small, or of that kind, so who was this Bill? with the unknown grown-up hand? the name on the lid was that of a jewelry shop in where? some Ohio town I had hardly heard of—Chillicothe?—and certainly never visited.
             The other large carton unpacked in the same way—box into box—but the feeling it gave me was the opposite of that suggested by the endless nest of Russian dollies it otherwise resembled, for what 1 was opening was a den of spaces which now covered the floor near my feet. It was plain that every ten-by-ten-by-eight container contained cubes which were nine by nine by seven, and eight by eight by six, and seven by seven by five, and so on down to three by three by two, as well as many smaller, thinly sided ones at every interval in between, so that out of one box a million million more might multiply, confirming Zeno’s view, although at that age, with an unfurnished mind, I couldn't have known of his paradoxes let alone have been able to describe one with any succinctness. What I had discovered was that every space contains more space than the space it contains.
             But Aunt’s actions, in packing volumes into volumes in this way, were the opposite of what I was doing now, poking into her affairs, because I was letting each box burgeon, whereas Aunt was cutting them all down to one size; she was collapsing them in upon one another, creating an omnivorous spatial appetite. Her room—our spare—had become a pitiless and always empty stomach, where each of these small houses—dwellings for scarves, for socks, for shoes, for slips—would be swallowed, digested, and disappear; indeed, my own home was being borne into this room, box by box, to be absorbed bit by bit.
             The closet, on the other hand, was so packed with coats and clothes as to prohibit movement. I could not imagine drawing out a hanger with its skirt or blouse intact. It would be like extracting a single sheet of paper from the middle of a ream. Beneath the bed, however . . . well, there was no beneath, for that normally wasted space was box solid. I slid, with difficulty, a wide flat spring-marked carton into view and opened it. Almost nothing, a tear of tissue paper, but then 1 suddenly had in hand, as if it had faded into its white cardboard floor only to reappear now, a lone luncheon napkin made of fine linen,
       otherwise plain, except for a monogram sewn in one corner: FK. K for Kohler? F for... ? giveness. There were things—gifts?—entombed here, mislaid without ever having been enjoyed, or items lost, like this napkin, from sets, sets forever marred and incomplete. 1 felt compelled—and compulsion is the correct characterization—I felt forced to unwedge and pull out another. Nothing. Another. Nothing. Another . . . another—finally I turned up one linked pair of pink baby booties cornered by the bullying edges of yet another container, itself empty except for a pearl-headed pin, which, given the opportunity, rolled into view like an unconfessed sin: small but exotic, sharp but far from deadly, missing but never missed.
          That was the solemn other side of this situation: that no one had cared to care for them, these booties; no one had noticed their absence when it would have counted; no one had undertaken the simplest search—to lift a layer of tissue paper, shake a box, tip whatever was in it out, recollect, after only the fewest minutes, the occasion when, with feigned surprise, they had been pleasantly received. I found a narrow knit tie, before I put the boxes back, a half-slip, a comb made of some animal's bone. Panning for gifts in the bed of the bed.
          I remember feeling chilled, as though 1 had swallowed a tray of ice, since the cold came in a rush from within. It was obvious that their true interiors had been ignored, but would Aunt notice that the order of her cartons had been disturbed? that a few stacks were straighter than they had been, or that a package from the Fligbee Company was resting on its side? I'd not stirred much dust, but perhaps Aunt had wired her stash with gray hairs I had disturbed, and whose unsettling would give me away. How many such secret beams had I broken, even though I hadn’t drawn out a drawer of the dresser or opened the lid on a pot of powder? Nevertheless (and the chill came from this, I think), I knew now I had to climb to the top of the attic stairs. What was left beneath the hat of the house that she had not stuffed with her crazy collections? caches 1 then took to be the hoards of a miser. Aunt hills, Culp would surely call them.
       1 didn't open these containers as if they were symbols; certainly they were nothing womblike or vaginal. I did not see them as expressions of insecurity. It never occurred to me that Aunt might have known little things had been left in her boxes like unborn babies. Or that she was withdrawing all these simple and ordinary objects from the arena of their eventual consumption. Even when I came on a carton which was filled with valentines and other kinds of greeting cards, and another which was packed with old letters, it never occurred to me she was in fact a curator of the commonplace, a kind of savior for the ephemeral, for tie clasps and pencil stubs, report cards and date books, the litter of life. She was not a novelist. She was simply nutty like the rest of the peo-
          pie around me, a family in need of fumigation That was all. A mind without a stock of ideas to graze and fatten on its grass, alas, is not a meadow. Still, I had to know how far her collection went, although I knew enough already to be alarmed, if not quite frightened.
            So I cleared a footpath quite systematically—at any rate, for me, with great deliberation—lifting out piles and putting them on her bed and bedside table, on the floor and out into the hall, in an order of climb as if numbered: tread #\, tread #2, and so on, till tread #top. As I progressed, piton after piton, toward the summit, 1 could see more soft heaps of sacks and fewer stacks, more lumpy piles than built-up blocks. There were rolls and folds and flats of paper—all kinds, all colors, shopping bags of rags and other refuse, small bottles by the trayload, medicine mostly, with dropper tops, calendars from a dozen different years whose months were never leafed through or rolled over, containing thousands of unmarked days, millions of unfilled hours—my god, the ticks un-tocked there, waiting, perhaps, their time to pass in the history of another era—several sets of dishes of the kind that are given away, flyswatters advertising window screens, catalogues of plumbing fixtures, packages of party napkins, paper tablecloths, wax-covered cups and cardboard spoons—the world will end as trash, in middens of scrap, rot, rust, and mildew, gaseous with decay—roHs 0f toilet paper, just in case, vases florist’s flowers come in, rose, amber, and green, like traffic lights, sacks of hard candy, peanuts in their shells, confetti, nail polish, spot remover, kitchen gadgets such as bottle stoppers are, hot pads, wooden trivets, magic slates and funny puzzles, cartoon books, assorted mailing labels and identifying tags, boxes of paper clips, pins, and tacks, mucilage, art gums, pens and inks—what else?—scratch-sided cartons of kitchen matches, ant and roach powders, traps for mice and bait for rats, old shoes, slippers, soap on a string, suspenders, clothespins, sunglasses in colorful cardboard frames, a jar of clear glass marbles—gee—Halloween masks, and several paper parasols in a dirty toy golf bag which had disappeared years ago but once was mine.
             In the middle of this mess, the trunk. Endeavoring to gleam through a settlement of dust. What somewhat surprised me was the fact that there was nothing whatever on its lid, not a tear of tissue, not a nub of pencil, nor a paper clip, not even, on its hazy top, a fingerprint. And now I felt the chill like a premonition. As if, which could not have happened, Aunt was standing behind me. There was no sacred space inside. The trunk was now full of what—when I examined them—1 found to be receipt books, lists, and ledgers, volumes marked records and accounts, notebooks full of blank checks, sales slips and order forms, pads for interoffice memos, and on them, everywhere, the name of Aunt’s previous employer. Here was what she had hauled home in a
       taxi the day she was let go. And it was obvious these books belonged to the company. Had they any value? Would the police come and get her? I didn’t know. Yet why the delay if these papers were significant? Had she simply extracted her bookkeeping system when she left, as if she'd gone home with what brung her? I didn’t know.
          ! worked hard, for an hour, to restore the scene to its original confusion, backing down the attic stairs, tread #top, tread #7, tread #6 . . . tread tfstop. The next few days were full of my sidelong looks, but I detected no change in Aunt's attitudes or posture. She bustled about her business. Bought oranges to bring to my dad, who wouldn't be able to peel them, and a large jar of rock candy for my mother, which I doubted the hospital would allow her to have. For me, I was grateful, she had "picked up on” (as she always put it), she had picked up on nothing.
          In my father's will, Aunt was given the use of the house for the length of her life. I suppose she filled it at least to flowing. Its image as Auntie's basement-attic was one I couldn’t bear to examine closely. Though I would dream of being back in my boyhood bed, beleaguered by boxes which were toppling into my room through the window, the only way in since I had barricaded my door. My school desk drawers would be crammed with lint and sewing threads and toothpicks in packets like needles. Once I escaped to college, 1 never returned except in my nightmares. The homeland of my family was hers.
            Mother Makes a Cake I I
          I remember when the years didn't roll by, time didn’t fly. I remember when it dragged its weary length along, stubbornly slowing as it neared the designate of my desire. For most kids and most occasions, that’s the way it worked. You ran after what you wanted as if you were Achilles attempting to overtake the tortoise, while, to ensure your misery, the path of hot pursuit and the line of time you’d need to pass the horny little waddle formed a converging, never convergent, series. Nearer but not yet, they teased. Closer and closer , . . still ... not quite. For the celebration of my chance arrival in the world, however, the strategy was reversed, because, as my birthday approached, the clock’s hands always accelerated wildly, the dreaded date bearing down on me as though it had become an appointment with the dentist. Desperately I wanted to ward it off, but 1 couldn't. Remember how the gloved hands of cartoon clocks would whirl, or how the
          pages of a calendar would peel from the screen, years curling back and flying off like fall leaves? Zeno was thereby zonked, never mind the math. Remember how the heroine was carried in her innocent canoe toward the falls? The roaring of the water grew always louder. The boat pitched, and— wowee—was it tossed. No one would reach her. Surely she was lost. Then Y® [“y§           would appear in a placidly florid box on the screen, and,
          since the cruel conclusion to the heroine s plight had been postponed till next week, everyone was excused to see what of Saturday afternoon remained on that other reel. Well, there was no respite like that to the recycle of my arrival. On the contrary, the boat bearing my helpless body would barely drift into the rapids when pieces of me could be seen below the torrent, clinging to rocks.
             Early in life, I learned to fear my birthday. Later, Christmas would follow close behind in the measured amount of my dislike. Finally, every holiday, even the Fourth of July, my former favorite, would fill me with apprehension. But it was the onset of my birthday which made my palms sweat.
             Now, of course, 1 can ignore the event. It passes without incident, often without any notice, not even by a casual, fleeting, or self-pitying thought. And 1 have to calculate my age afresh each time a form must be filled out, an application made, an answer of that kind offered up. An historian who hates dates—that's me.
             The newspapers are full of foolish remembrance.
                 FIFTY YEARS AGO TODAY
            —this or that happened, they will say. I say skip it. Where’s the significance? Fifty years ago this hour I was enjoying my first shower. Or they burden us with a list of famous people born on the same day, though those days may have dawned and died in different years. I want to know what’s alike about them. On every February twenty-fifth does it rain? do men named Smith eat shellfish for dinner? Astrologers have to be crazy to go ape over these meaningless conjunctions. So and so s team, the sports page proclaims, hasn’t defeated Hopscotch High since 1963. Let bygones go bye-bye, say I. Moreover, in the news, weather is never weather. It is the excuse for an historical reverie. We have to go back to 06 to find a snowfall as deep as this, a drought nearly as severe, heat as hot, hail as heavy, a sky so crystal clear. And they—the press, at the apparent request of all of us—confer continuous life on past events, awarding them birthdays as though they had been born like babies:
                     THE JOHNSTOWN FLOOD IS THIRTY YEARS OLD TODAY
              —SURVIVORS REMINISCE AT A REUNION HELD IN A LOCAL HOTEL.
      What the hell. There’s no point in having a history, if this is what it’s going to be used for: almanackery. Twenty years of marriage, fifty of life, six since you bought the Ford, forty since you touched your first tit—why not?—and would my mother want to date her first drink, and dream back to it, and have another swallow now in its honor?
        The newly hitched have monthaversaries until there’s nothing any longer new about being wedlocked, nothing really wed about it, nothing more monthly than the bride's curse, nothing to celebrate, nothing they wish to memorialize. Old-marrieds turn to anniversaries in order to extend the time, between scheduled reminders, they have a license to forget. Public monuments are constructed of similar confusions. 1 could understand it if the Jews put up a cenotaph or something to commemorate the hour Adolf Hitler’s body burned to a cinder, but why beat the drum for the deaths of the so-called good guys? Dante is done for. Hurray. Let’s have a holiday. Issue a stamp. Mint a coin. Toss a party. Hold a dance. Not on my time. Not with my dough. Have a birthday? Not a chance.
        You are supposed to be glad you're alive. Then why the bribes? Are the gifts you get intended to be rewards for making it through another year without committing suicide? Here’s a sawbuck: act happy to be here. Or are the gifts you get imitations of the gifts which were given Jesus? Is each of us born in a barn beneath a star? is each of us holy, and a chip off God’s block? and is that why we shall all be crucified? Does giving a gift make me a magus? Or are we honoring, really, our dear mom, dear dad, who fucked so furiously to safely seed us, or just mom who did all the work after that, threw up, got fat, then had her insides unzipped so a guy in a white coat could pull the lucky newborn one of us out like a hurting tooth, hold us head over heels like a prize catch, to howl when we had our asses slapped?
        Mom and dad are just so happy we’re here. Overjoyed. We are the light of their lives, the hope for their future, proof of dad’s potency, the leading citizens of moms maybe second-class marital state, but her own little domain, nevertheless (kiiche, kirche, kinder, karpool, koffeeklatch, kucholdry, hountryklub, kancer of the kotene, kaput), konsequently we’re a little like pots and pans, thanks a lot; and so
            they are remembering with pleasure the day we appeared, and showering us with gifts of gratitude, sure, for all we’ll do, clearing away bloody slops from dad’s butcher shop, cleaning up after a party enlivened by bootlegged booze, making the folks proud, getting well wed and only then bred, buying a car, purchasing a home, getting ahead, caring for them then in their cranky old age, letting them meddle in our marriage, meddle with their grandkids, while dying by the dollarload, expecting we shall keep their memories green and tend their graves—good luck; hence the pretty packages and the chocolate cake, the whoop-de-do, which still sounds like a bribe to me; because I know my folks weren’t grateful that 1 was a badass back-talkmg brat, with all my own ideas, a liar from my first cry, because I wasn’t hurt, just bored by being born, and quick to walk so 1 could run away, quick to talk so I could sass, soon to pull my pudding, fast on a bike and an accomplished player of hooky, a kid who took unkindly to them, whined as though it were a profession, complained with talent, screwed up with skill, and generally filled their life with satisfaction, fun, and pride. So natch they should load my plate with love on my birthday, and bring my friends to see me as though I were dying, and con gifts from them too, or rather from their parents, with the promise of party favors and a peek in one another’s trousers, a piece of cake and a horn to blow through, as well as a stomachache to take home and nurse all night.
               They say gifts are just love’s substitute; that presents replace regard; or they say that it’s the intention, the feeling, the spirit, that matters, and that no one merely counts the cost, reads the tag and saves the label, or mostly admires the wrapping, or sometimes actually appreciates the thoughtfulness in a perfect choice. People like to get things because they’re just plain greedy (but that’s not stressed), or give things because the gesture demonstrates how well off the giver is, and what he or she can afford to be free with (we’re Lady Bountiful, aint we? Lord Largess). Gift giving! golly gee! It proves how much affection can be purchased with a chocolate bunny, or a bra with nipple peeps, a fake-fur coat, clean used-once used car.
               Okay. How much? Never enough.
               A birthday is a saint’s day; it fastens you to a star; it pencils you on a page of the population problem (given the birthrate, it’s too early for the indelibilities of ink). A birthdate gives you soulmates, makes you orbital with others, wakes your snoozy Fates to take a look at your lifeline. Above all it puts you at a place of birth like a suspect at the scene of a crime; it fastens you down, the way one day your grave will, to a spot on the earth. Otherwise you might never know you were a Hoosier, though you were one; you would be deprived of an ancestral home, a hearth, a passel of cousins, the molestation of uncles, the doting ministrations of faint great-aunts and other distant connections; your arrival would not be noticed by the papers, no one would know where to come to call;
        there would be no place, years later, you could pay a nostalgic visit; above all, your sense of self would lack teeth, lack bite, lack assurance—an T unattached to any ‘dentity—without a town, state, country, and household of origin—a family, clan, class, language, race—to determine who you were.
           Some things are amazing. Without lifting a finger, you can be born a Protestant.
           It never happened to me. I was spared. But I have read books. I have been to the movies. Birthdays, like weddings, anniversaries, baptisms, bar mitzvahs, wakes, are occasions to retie family ties, renew family feuds, restore family feeling, add to family lore, tribalize the psyche, generate guilt, exercise power, wave a foreign flag, talk in tongues, exchange lies, remember dates and the old days, to be fond of how it was, be angry at what it should be, and weep at why it isn’t.
           All this is frosting. Let's get to the filling.
           It was going to be my birthday. My mother said she would make a cake. Chocolate because chocolate was customary. She'd coat it liberally too, but not with the white stuff which gave frosting its name, but with sweet thick fudge; then she’d dot it with chocolate kisses and stake it like a building lot with multicolored candles, each erect in its rosette, wick ready to sustain flame and be blown in a single breath. Out. And the guaranteed fulfillment of a wish would follow upon the deed.
           This party was going to be my first. And a surprise. My mother told my father she would make a cake. The cake would be a chocolate cake, she said, because there was no other kind, not for a boys birthday. Chocolate was manly—not wimpy like lemon or girly like vanilla—and this cake would be manly through and through, frost to foot. And because boys would want big pieces, my parents decided to invite five; that way the cake could be deep-sixed, and slices of a challenging size obtained. It would be, my mother said, a three-layer cake, the middle layer surrounded with a kind of chocolate pudding, the top covered with semisweet, swirled and eddied, kisses puckering its fudgy face, frosting hanging down along its side like a small round table's cape.
           It would be a cake baked at some sacrifice; the cost, my father complained, would be considerable, couldn’t two layers suffice? but my mother replied that the cake would look low then, meager, flatter than a hat; and a proper boy's birthday cake should be high, rich to the point of being raucous, he knew boy's ways, surely, boy's eyes. My father wondered if candy kisses weren’t like rouge on a rose, a bit much; however, my mother insisted on them; it will sit surrounded by kisses in their shiny silver foil, she said, a goody among goodies, its great shape a tower to the small, the darkness it was cloaked in like night above the bright: thats the way she wanted it to be.
             It would be a cake consumed at some sacrifice, my aunt said, since there’d be not even a crumb left if it were cut in sixths to serve six; there'd be scarcely a smear on the cake plate for others to enjoy. You can lick the pans, my mother said, there’ll be cake pans, saucepans, mixing bowls, stirring spoons, spatulas—lots to slather. Maybe one of the kids will be home from school sick and won’t be able to come, my aunt said with little confidence, knowing her luck. Do you know how to cut a cake into six pieces, my father asked. Anybody knows that, mother said, with unusual certitude. 1 mean six equal pieces, equal to all those gut-greedy eyes, equal as that. I’ll practice on a piece of paper, my mother replied with unheard-of resourcefulness. That’s what the cook wants when she’s cutting cake—to be watched by greedy eyes, encouraged by hungry tongues, advised.
             There would be balloons, it was determined, one for each guest, with a couple as spares in case one or more went pisst; however, the color provoked concern until they settled on mixed; no need for special napkins, that sort of thing, my father said, but my mother pushed for paper tablecloths, straws, hats, and favors all round. My god, he’s just a kid, we don’t have to crown him. My mother claimed everybody at parties had them: hats, straws, favors, paper tablecloths, napkins covered with cute cavorting animals you could wipe mouth-chocolate on. You don’t want him to be ashamed of his own birthday party, do you? Hell, he won’t notice, my father said. You don’t want shame to come to me either, do you? Honest true-to-form parties need favors, she insisted. They need funny buttons. The kids’ mothers will bring their kids to the do and then fetch them again when it’s over, so they will naturally see something of the house, the decorations, and hear from their kids how it went. We can’t help that. It’ll happen. We’ll be judged. I’ll be at work, my father said. You don’t want them to think we’re small. I never had such a party, my aunt said. It’s tacky not to have games with prizes. Games like what, 1 heard my father ask: like throwing balls through windows? games like Kiss My Ass? or Spin the Bottle? By themselves, boys don’t play Spin the Bottle. They sure play Kiss My Ass. Not at my birthday party, my mother said, with a rare edge to her voice.
             That’s how I learned my mother was going to have a birthday party—by accidentally overhearing them arguing in the kitchen while I was sitting on the back steps counting the inches the water would have to rise in order to engulf me and my men, cast here, on this little rocky isle, by a storm so severe that last night while I tried to sleep it had blown down limbs, and the driveway was covered with prematurely graying green leaves.
             I kept the secret secret though it was no longer a surprise. For many years I believed in Santa Claus just to let squared-off adults continue to round their customary corners. Why should they think that a cynical kid who, at twelve.
       had already thrown out God along with the baptismal water; why should they think that such a skeptic would continue to believe in polar elves and flying sleighdeers and a bag-bearing fatso in a funny suit, breaking and entering like a burglar half a billion homes in one eve; why should they imagine I would even receive let alone entertain such a set of silly notions? Well, I suppose they didn't. I pretended to believe and they pretended to believe me. It is the paradigm of successful human relations.
         Okay. That’s the first layer. Now for some pudding.
         1 shouldn’t have kept the secret secret or planned on pretending to be surprised. By remaining mum, by not derailing the birthday train before it got out of the yard, I had no say about who would be invited—five friends. They'd be boys, because boys at the age boys are called boys haven't even boy friends, they have pals, or chums—five chums, then. But 1 hadn't any real pals. I hated all my friends. They believed in Santa Claus. They wouldn’t let me be the Indian scout or the captain or the chief of police. When the water rose over the last rocks, they would be the first to drown. Already I could see their limbs flailing wildly in the sea’s angry surge. No weeps from me when they went under.
         So my father drew up a list I never saw and consequently could not correct: Fat Freddie, for instance, the bully who loved to bump me on the school steps so my books would spill, I'd have cut him off; or little rascal Richie, a squint of a kid whose nose ran out his mouth, and whose sniveling was not only continuous but obnoxiously loud, he’d have been erased; and King George, the snob in fancy pants, who hadn’t invited me to his own birthday shindy, so shit on him; and Larry, who did just what I ordered, always, but never did it well, he wouldn’t have been worth having; certainly not the Squat, either, who was nothing more than a set of gestures, all obscene; however, these were to be my guests, 1 later—too late, later—learned.
         ’Guest' is a treacherous word. A guest is an ungrateful gobbler. Guests make me feel imperiled like my aunt (whose sweet tooth was huge but never luckv), because they ate the piece you wanted, broke your favorite toy, got bossy and tried to take over, played with the present they’d brought, if they’d brought one, and were people generally you were obliged to be nice to, even though 1 never was, because they were that word, ’guest,’ as terrible a word as the word sister. I bet you d like a little sister, some simperer would pretend to ask, and I would smile and say. No, and I don’t want a pony either.
         Now for the central layer, the layer surrounded by goo as I was surrounded on all sides by water while 1 pondered the loss of my men, foolishly swept away, foolishly inclined to eat their own fingers and drink sea, such sea as they dared to collect in the spray which filled the creases of their clothing, at which they foolishly sucked, although i had sternly warned them. I was in a tight spot.
              I don't know what made my mother want to make a cake and have a party. She hated strangers in the house. She was generally too drunk to attend, not to say give, parties. Of course I didn’t know she was a drunk, then. What’s a drunk? And nobody knew I knew. Anything. My mother knew I didn’t know what, in fact, I knew. 1 knew that. We felt it worked—religiously not knowing.
           It became a cult. Of course 1 didn't know what an agnostic was. What's an ag- ' nostic? But 1 seriously didn't know what made my mother want to make a cake and invite five kids in off the street to eat it. Off the street as far as she was concerned. What did she know about my friends? She refused to believe I didn’t have any. Naturally, her son was popular as a holiday with everybody. So I pretended to have a lot. Of this and that. Funs. Hobbies. Friends. She also decided she knew I wanted a sister, and she explained to me time and time again how her cesarean, the operation which had relieved her of me, had made further children impossible. Your mother is unbearable, my father said, making what he thought was a joke, but meaning it of course, every word, and we all knew it, though we imitated a laugh.
              For the life of me, nevertheless, and to this day, I don’t know why she persisted, how she got her way against my father's better judgment and his allegedly tight wad, or how she got my aunt to help her while keeping my aunt in a subordinate role—not a bit easy—because my aunt always wanted to be Lady Glad Handout herself. She deserved a medal, my aunt did: bribery’s bronze star. Still, my mother did persevere, and did buy paper napkins with cartoon creatures on them, and hats with crimped edges, balloons in mixed colors, though mostly green, straws with Coca-Cola printed along their length, paper plates which looked suspiciously Christmassy, and candles for the cake which were the color of small cigars. In little packs of five. Cigarillos? For favor. So chocolate was the theme—the whole shebang was to be the color of dung and have the wallop of a stimulating drug.
              I don’t know why my mother wanted me to have a party for this particular birthday, either. There was nothing special about it, not like one’s first birthday would be, or those which arrive at standard divisions of time like five or ten, or when you’ve reached eighteen or twenty-one, hit forty or sixty-five. Besides, I'd never had a party of any kind, though, of course, I’d gone to some, even if none 1 went to were thrown by King George. So shit on him. Maybe she thought 1 should have a party before I died, or she died, or while she thought she could still make a cake without getting baked herself.
              My birthday that year fell on a Friday, and Friday was a school day, so the party would take place just following school, in order to ruin the participants’ dinner. That was okay with me. Since I didn’t know there was to be a party—ha ha— after all, I hadn't been invited—maybe I’d go somewhere else when school let
       out, maybe to a sweetshop or a movie, and not show up at the house, and not have to deal with reality. Or be nice to anybody. Or have to say ‘Thanks a lot."
          1 suppose my mother made the cake that afternoon, so it would be as fresh as it could be and still surprise me, even though 1 could smell it when 1 walked in, and 1 could see the paper cones and green balloons driftbouncing about on the floor, the disheveled stack of paper napkins, the orange Halloween horns. I went all the same upstairs with my symbolic load of books as if I'd noticed nothing. My father at the store. My aunt in the hideyhole she called her room, because I could hear her rustling about as soon as I reached the landing. My mother, therefore, in the kitchen. Having a nip. No doubt.
          Well, we’ve hit, 1 think, cake bottom. Because nobody came. That is, none of the guests. My father, home from the store, leaned in at last on his cane, puzzled because there was no noise, no hilarity, no party. Where is everybody? Who is everybody, I asked. Well, Freddie, for one. Freddie! Freddie hits me! Every day! Hit him back, then, what's the matter with you. Shit on Freddie, 1 didn't say. Who else? That George . . . George Cullen kid. That guy, gosh! He never invites me. To anything. He has a party every time he shits, I didn’t say, I did say breathes, and he never invites me. Jeez. Who else? Now my father is angry and defensive, though I don’t know what defensive is, just what angry is. My mother, my aunt, and I pretend not to notice. 1 forget who else, my father said. We try to do something for you, you give no thanks, no thanks is all we get, you got no friends, I can see why, who would come here anyway, look at this, you call this a party, why are the balloons on the dining room floor? I blew them up myself, my aunt says, tenderly puffing her cheeks as if they ached or were sore from their exertions.
          What have you done to the dining room? Where are the chairs? What’s this green crepe? Why the balloons?
          1 remembered the plates, my mother said, her voice muzzy, but 1 may have forgotten to mail the invitations. You could have, my aunt says, as if supportive, you could have forgotten. Who are the other guys? the other guys who aren’t coming? The little giggly fellow, I guess, my aunt answers, because no one else volunteers. My mother is watching my father watch her watch him. She has just come out of the kitchen with the cake. She passes a vague hand across her face.
       I m sorry, she tries to say. I found the envelopes in a drawer this morning, she confesses. With the forks. I was looking for a knife, she explains. The envelopes were nicely addressed. These plates are pretty for paper, my aunt says, as if supportive. Usually paper isn’t pretty. But these are. Forgot, my father doesn’t thunder because it hurts him now clear down in the bones and sinews of his chest to thunder, so he says it in a tone of total exasperation, as if he were dealing with someone he dare not damage but wishes to destroy. I think so, my mother says,
           because the envelopes—addressed—were in the drawer. Just the envelopes? Yes. [ think so. I don't remember. My aunt starts to pick up this and that as if the party were over. My mother's eyes are red from drinking or weeping or maybe stove smoke. Did something spill in the oven, I ask. The kid who dances, my father suddenly says. He was invited. 1 don’t tell him that the Squat lifts his leg like a pissing dog because he's pretending to be a pissing dog, right down to the pissing, the pissing stream itself. My aunt pops a balloon. She cries out in pretend pain. So my father begins shooing the balloons out of the house. The balloons are mostly green and roll out into the backyard like large limes. He is quietly cursing his arthritis and the fact that he cannot kill them with his cane. He is quietly cursing his wife and his sad situation in life. He is quietly cursing me, of course. And my no-show friends. 1 am these balloons he is golfing now into the yard. My mother and my aunt and me. My no-good no-show friends. I bought hats and horns on sale, my mother tried to say, 1 think she said, her voice faint and distant, desolate as an empty bottle.
              Boy. We almost had a good time. But I’m looking at my chocolate cake, which is sitting perilously on an edge of the dining room table. The table has been interleaved to its limit, and over it, at places, paper cloths have been tossed, as blankets are for a picnic. 1 wonder if she forgot the favors. What favors? The favors you said you were going to get. I’ve hardly finished my sentence when I realize I’ve given the game away. They have to know now 1 knew the whole time. But no one is paying attention. They don’t want to know anyway. Caring makes you miserable. They’d be happier—possibly less sad? less hurt? no, not a mite less miserable—if the word cake' had never been baked.
              What happened to the cake, 1 said. The candles were all tipped like short masts on a high sea. The frosting was more than quietly glaciating, it was visibly oozing down the cake’s sides, puddling around its base where all the silver kisses were, elevating some as if they were about to be set afloat and, like a kind of benevolent lava, overtaking and covering others. On the top of my surprise, beneath its outer coating of fudge, I could now see a showing of dark brown cakey skin. Naked cake, l thought. ’Naked’ was a word 1 liked at that age. The cake, I said. ‘Cake' was becoming a favorite. By the minute.
              Looking closely 1 could see granulations. The filling was also easing itself from between the cake’s layers. It was pudding all right. And it wasn't staying pud. It went its own way, my mother almost wailed. It was supposed to be sticky. Through the door to the kitchen, which swung, l could see nothing but calamity. It feels sticky. It tastes sticky. Why won’t it stick if it’s sticky? A pale blue haze, some sort of baked smoke, still hung like gnats near the ceiling light. In the sink there was a shipwreck of soiled pans. There was something runny and faintly yellow on helter-skelters of the floor. Knives and spoons encased in
      the dried blood of cake lay about on the counter. The aspirin bottle my mother kept her gin in was standing prominently in the midst of the mess.
         Back at the cake, the frosting was falling, no longer merely sliding or seeping off. Its dark divested body looked even darker now, rising like a toy volcano would amid the flow of its molten make-believe rock. The confection was beginning to sag where the filling of pudding had escaped. This emergent bubblier substance was a darker shade of dark, as if there had been different eruptions on different dates, and one wash of the magma, which in my mind made up the center of the earth, was now cooler than the other. Maybe the whole thing would turn into a hill of glass. The silver foil gleamed wickedly now, as if the little candy cones were the domes and tips and crowns of covered towns.
         All my men had shortly before been drowned, accidentally carried off on message day, the day 1 had inadvertently learned 1 was to celebrate my birth by means of a chocolate cake covered with chocolate frosting and lit with chocolate-colored candles, and surrounded, at its ample base, with an applauding crowd of kisses. Some kids have it all. Others are swept away into an indifferent sea.
         I wondered how my mother had managed to talk herself into this ill-fated project, for any plans made her nervous, which was an excuse to drink; outsiders, strangers, guests, set her off into alcohol like a gambler cast away among casinos; and complex problems, requiring several steps and the satisfaction of many simultaneous demands, would frazz her so she would be spooning or forking or sewing or cleaning, while swigging during every pause between them, like punctuation: stir nip, wipe nip, thread nip, chop nip, whip nip, nip nip.
         Why, when my mother found the envelopes in the utensil drawer, and knew, then, that she had forgotten to mail the invitations, let alone collect regrets, did she go ahead and bake such an ambitious cake, the recipe for which would make even an accomplished cook a little nervous; even if her anxieties might have been relieved by knowing no one was coming; although she would have to expect her husband s exasperation, and believe in my disappointment at not being surprised? Go figure. Maybe she felt from the first she had to do the right thing by me, and throw a party for my birthday, and make me a cake as it was customary for mothers to do, and carry on, in spite of every obstacle, perhaps with the help of a swallow or two of gin, which may have enabled her to forget the invitations in the first place, but forget, when she remembered she’d forgot, that shed forgotten. Go figure.
         Gin didn’t make her feel good; it often made her sick; but at least the gin didn t cause her to feel sorry for the things she should have felt sorry for. Tears
           of frustration had surely been shed. There was my father's fury once more to contend with, and she must have felt silly about the invitations and her quite complete failure as a baker. But 1 think she’d drunk enough not to feel sad on my account, or guilty again about being an alcoholic mom, numb in that regard, and able to wait in a chair like a pile of discarded clothes for my aunt and me to clean the kitchen (my aunt trying to lick a spoon or two with her usual lack of luck), aslump in a chair, watching as well as she was able to watch, through the haze of her unhappiness, the birthday cake become birthday lake—and were those white shining swimming somethings the necks of swans?
              Well, everything works out for the best, 1 would later learn Dr. Pangloss often says. Anyway, what works out is not always the worst. I had been saved, i had been picked from my rock by a helicop. The friends I hadn t wanted to be invited weren't invited; and even though the cake slithered and melted and sagged itself into a bog of chocolate the size of a small swamp, and we ate on paper plates for a week, and used napkins the color of grass for quite a spell, the party hadn’t failed because it hadn’t been held, and nobody had been embarrassed or made to feel ashamed of themselves in front of strangers (we were beyond that with one another); only my father passed through a period of painful shrugs, not too bad, considering; and, after all, none of those elaborate calories had been consumed either; my aunt saved quite a few pieces of idled paper, hats, and horns—who knew what uses they might someday serve? The favors never showed up.
              In short, 1 had been spared. Helicopped. Normally, my nightmares were made of might have beens: those ubiquitous, ugly, and tormenting “what ifs.” What if you gave a party and . . . ? So 1 had suffered a stroke of grand good luck: one of those sadistic “what ifs” had been realized, but to my benefit. What a gift! Such a favor from fortune would not be bestowed soon again. Future birthdays could count upon being blown and blighted. Guests might arrive, but only to view the ruins. Or dinner might be perfectly prepared and perfectly served to faddists who ate only Japanese noodles. My balloon had burst, yes, but in nobody’s face, so I should not try or tempt fate and expect to escape every oncoming commemoration as easily. Instead, I should spend life standing still, and exhale slowly only out a window in a wind. Then nothing might inflate. Nothing break.
              Speaking of balloons, they rolled languidly about the yard until punctured by the spines of acorns and other normally innocuous little sharps. Most died in soft blats or slow fizzes rather than in bursts. The balloons had never been bigly blown. My mother had put her cake straight onto its tarnished silver tray without employing a paper doily, and thats where we are wading around now, hip deep in snake swamp, most of my men bitten through their boots by serpents who—I do say who—are silent and swift as wavelets. How many have I lost? I d
      say forty: fourteen Freddies, seven subjects of King George, two Richies, eleven Larrys, and six Squats. Lost not without remainder. There, lying on the tawny surface of the quicksand, are the felt fragments of their hats—gray-green, leaf-green, and balloon-green each hiding a grisly secret, a head still held upright underneath the foamy scum. Later I would read of burial practices like these: prisoners, politicians, peasants, sunk like posts into the ground.
        Maybe the party was intended to remember my mother’s past, and not to count the slender years of mine, to recall those days when she wasn’t in one,
      when she was sort of what she wished for me—hopeful, trusting, sweet_in a
      dress made of nine or seven skirts, and whirled in a happy spiral by her father through a blue blue movie sky, he crying Happy birthday, Margaret, I've brought you a pony from the fair. Because it is possible that those good old days she claims in her cups to remember were really good old days indeed. No. I cannot believe it. Only in books. In books I no longer read. My lies lie on my past like a haze, and romanticize the landscape. In the present, the past is always picturesque. And were there good old days—if there had been_____then
      their loss would be unendurable. Had Margaret had a pony, as she always falsely claimed, she would have been thrown from its back and maimed. Even in those books I no longer read, she would have sadly lost her seat. If we hadn’t been expelled, Paradise would soon have felt like a small dull town and we’d have caught the first train. I know better than to pine, for I am a student of history, which is, after all, a chronicle of missed opportunities, invitations unsent though nicely signed, plans gone awry, cakes half baked.
                 I remember, after the kitchen had been cleaned and my mother sent to bed,
      I buried the cake in a paper bag, though not before I had picked out the candles from the goo where they had fallen to rinse them off under a lukewarm tap, and the Hershey’s kisses too, still in their foil and flag and armor, which I did arrange in ranks as I washed them, marveling at their resilience, because they had come through it all with nothing which could be called a scratch, whistle bright and happily silver, tents on a blot-dry plain, there, where an army camped, in disciplined ranks, in just, even royal, repose—indifferent, unenjoyed, invincible.
           Blood on the Living Room Rug
    Menopause, for my mother, did not signify a cessation of flow; for if, by flow,” one meant the ongoing passages and rhythms and changes of life, then hers had puddled long ago, was at best marshy, at worst wholly stagnant, a life
            whose simplest and most requisite routines were increasingly impossible to maintain, like finding hay for your elephant in Santa Fe; whereas, if one put ones emphasis upon cessation, that wouldn t be appropriate either, for my mother’s monthlies now were day to day; she had a permanent pad on, though I don’t wish to suggest that she was often able to change a sodden napkin for a fresh one, or that she even cared, since she apparently didn’t, just dripped willy-nilly, wherever she was, which was either in bed, on the davenport, or possibly in the breakfast nook where she played solitaire or worked her crossword puzzles.
              As far as I was concerned, the chief change occurred at the unspecifiable moment when 1 ceased to call my mother by her many Margaret names and began calling her mother, as if I knew she deserved the respect and distance of the dead; as if I knew she was my mother because the fact had been attested to by several certificates; because Peg, Meg, Marg, and so on, suggested an intimacy no longer possible; because, though 1 certainly lived in the same house with her, and on what could be called “intimate terms,” only a nearby life, not a close one, was possible. 1 had become a walled enclave in a slum and 1 went out only when I felt certain I could not be seen, and kept away from windows, and each day made my ramparts a little higher, my vigilance more vigorous.
              Apparently her "flow” would be dry for a while, and then suddenly go poom like an arroyo, releasing frightening amounts all at once, in varying degrees of freshness and ranges of color, as if her bleeding had been going on somewhere without her help, in an inside far away, among a distant range of hills. How much her irregularity was the result of her drinking, and how much was due to a disordered but sober nature, it was difficult to know, although there was no obvious effort to find out, either. My father would simply tell her she should see a doctor, and fall back in bed himself, unable to slide easily away from the puddle she’d made on her side of the sheets; my aunt would nag Peg about it every a.m., but the nag was more like the noise of a chirpy bird who has come to the feeder every morning for months, at first anticipated, then ignored, so that only the absence of tweet and flutter would have registered; while 1 pretended to be innocently ignorant of all things female, including what it meant to have a cunt, in order to hear no complaint, see no problem, and speak no sympathy, supposing secretly that it was the consequence of every woman’s life of sin, of drinking too much, with daytime on your hands in an empty house, because sooner or later there’s nothing to mind, nothing to mend, nothing to mum, only dishes and dinner to do, solitaire to play, crosswords to solve, the radio to sit by and the wall to watch, all the while curiously breasted, crotched, wombed, and cursed, of course, with the curse of the unclean—cursed by God Himself, I’d heard the radio, Sundays, say, in another one of God’s petulant
      moments, I supposed, since, for an omnipotent deity, He clearly had trouble getting His way—which was seeing to the transmission of a single sin through generation after generation, and consequently to centuries of retribution. And people complained of the Nazis? If we did as God does, we would do just what we do do: we live, we judge, we plan badly—consequently one day we also bleed upon the rug.
        So nothing was done until, I suppose, it became pointless to try, when it was no longer possible to ignore, when she would vanish into a fantasy too extreme to tolerate, or when she would hemorrhage and collapse on the carpet, and I would come home from school and find her there, bathrobe hanging open like an unhinged gate, flannel dark and sopping, hair unpinned, her face folded against the floor like a discarded hankie, and call for an ambulance which would take her away once more to an anonymous ward where they would cauterize her sex down there deeper than a dick goes, 1 was told, before sending her on to the asylum to have her brains betrayed, the cells shaken up and shocked, rerolled like dice thrown out of a cup into never a winning number.
        The doctors diagnosed her then as in deep depression, a slough of despond, so to speak, like a sea her hormones had slid her into; a melancholy hastened and helped along by her possible dismay at growing old, at the loss of romance from her life, my increasing independence, her husband's progressively crippled condition, and so on; factors, they felt, they had seen before, since her case certainly wasn't unique or even unusual, though not so common as the cold, still frequent enough as to cause little interest, and whose treatment could be spelled out in diagnostic books along with its description—mal de mom, the housewife's hysteria—but I heard little beyond the phrases which secured the status of the medical profession to the wall of greatest resistance, they had a license not to listen. Mostly I remember the tap tap tap of one physician s pencil against the pages of his appointment book—tap tap tap, while he talked, telling me how grown up 1 was tap to take this commitment tap tap upon myself tap acting tap as it were tap tap for my father tap in our sordid family business tap tap the business of getting rid of mother tap tap tap by entrusting her tap to the tap tap State and the tap tap therapy of tap tap shock since we couldn't afford tap anything tap tap better, you tap betcha, you tap tap bastard, you tap tap doc.
        I signed things though I couldn’t buy a beer. 1 attested to the squiggle that was my father’s scrawl, and did her in in duplicate and then accompanied her in a cab to the hospital as if she were going just for a test or two, an office visit, sitting in the backseat with her fist in her mouth so as not to throw up, and beseeching me silently the entire trip to assure her everything would be all right, she wouldn t be left alone (although loneliness was what was wrong with her,
           we all thought), begging not to be cast adrift, not to be abandoned for long; whereupon 1 stood before the elevator which had a folding fence for a door, to place a last kiss on her forehead like the kiss of Judas; it should have bled, burned her, scarred, and maybe it did, the kiss I put on her powdered forehead like a print; muttering that it . . . it—what?—it . . . would all be all right— it . . . sure soon not long only a mo just a min no time at all but a bit I said as she slid up out of sight toward her DTs and her sober fits and the jimjams and jars they would give her brains like frying beans and the, in effect, crazed corner of the loony bin which would catch her, jail she would die in, a prisoner of tip tap, recipient of top tup, victim of the zzizz zapp.
             1 learned not to think about it. 1 learned to forget even the little dents her dirt-dark red nails made in my fingers where she clutched them while we traveled to the hospital in the cab, bag in the back, a bag too big to bring for a simple one-nightie, for a dinky round of medicinal drinks, blood lets, and hot spa merry ha-has. 1 nearly gave the game away, as I was always doing, by forgetting to bring her suitcase in, as if I knew she’d never need it again, as if she’d live for as long as she'd live in a little tie-sided white tent, not actually so different from her bathrobes, crookedly buttoned when they still had buttons, occasionally pinned, and which had the bad habit of flapping open, exposing her discombobulated body, which nevertheless must have done the trick, hey hey, it must have got the breadman to go for it, to try for the hole-she-bang, as Culp writes the words, straight from his fucktruck, carrying cake in a wire rack, raunchy as a French loaf and that soon stiff, a fucktruck sidepaneled with, appropriately, a decal of rompy rabbits.
             She knew; she knew; deep down, she knew without catching on, without that moment of actual ah ha (four letters, exclamation of surprise), because she’d always been carried in on a stretcher before, and scooted to an examination alcove on a gurney; she had always been taken to the city, too, damn near down the street, yet here she was this time, dressed as she would be for her coffin, with a purse hung over one arm, her white hair in a white hairnet, holding my hand with the tight pinch of those of her fingers which weren’t squinched in her mouth to cork its contents; clutching me, hoping to hang on to my heart as if it could keep her afloat (my heart, which was studying how to turn to stone); clutching me the entire, seemingly endless though only hour-long, up hill and dell down, gently curving, riverside drive to the State Institution, a place past anything you would call just out of town, its windows, beyond reach and remedy, steel screened, its doors chained, even its care made of glazed brick, leached of color to match my mother’s blood-drained face. Because she was going to be “committed.’
             My father was too weak just then to get out of bed, too tortured to walk, too pained to pretend this was only a little visit. There was no way he could even
       get to the car, let alone ride any distance in it while whistling and humming as if he were merely accompanying his wife to her preliminary poke in the gizzard, singing not to worry, Peg, not to fear, in a soft alto. No. He was out of the question. My aunt, when asked, simply burst into snivels, without troubling to run through the repertoire of her peculiar yet practiced passivities, despite the fact that she possessed all the cowers of an accomplished cur, merely whimpering in her highest register and by this means alone demonstrating her unfitness for any but the most elementary and emotionally neutral tasks. So I was defaulted into the duty, though I threw my own tantrum, a doomed and futile gesture, because there was nary a friend, by this time, to call on, nor a relative nearby whose help might be enlisted, hence 1 had to be the goat—Benedict Iscariot, the duplicitous double agent. The feeling became useful later when 1 tried to understand the ambivalent emotions of those who fingered friends to punitive authorities and gave up loved ones to their fate.
         Perhaps the precipitating absurdity had occurred a few months earlier. My father had been wasting away for some time. I must admit that the attention given him, the care for his condition, was far from adequate. My aunt made broths, and I spooned them. My mother stood by in a daze and spoke irrelevantly of earlier times as if they were historical ages so notable they deserved names and numbers like national holidays. I don t believe the broths had much that was consonantal to them, and you cannot live on awe’ alone, even if it’s encased in brawn, not for long, at any rate; meanwhile my father's tortured bones were beginning to poke out of his body at alarming angles.
         I decided he had to receive decent treatment so he could somehow regain his strength, though for what worthwhile task it was hard to envision. I knew my aunt would continue to make soup out of something not yet water, so I created a condition of calm in myself and made the call: come and get him; because once they had him, I felt, they would have to do something for this Belsenated body; they would have to hover, holding white robes over their normal indifference, they would at least sedate him, though it hurt most when he tried to move and right now he was too weak and too emaciated to succeed, except it still seemed to pain him when he lay there willing what would not lift to lift anyway, lying on his bedsores not so successfully as a fakir, and making a map of his little local hell by means of the skeletal configuration of his arthritic aches, staring through the ceiling at the what above? not attic dust, not stars, not sky, I supposed, but buzzards, other soaring birds, dying in a movie desert, his eyes larger than before because they saw now for a skull.
         My mother, that day, had slipped into her funk before noon, and had fallen into a low snooze upon the sofa in the living room. I thought this was fortunate, because asleep she was at least out of action and would not ask uncomprehending questions of the stretcher men when they came, or try to prevent
            them from taking her husband away, nor would 1, then, be called upon to calm her, to describe with excruciating clarity what she drank to keep from confronting, or be required to comfort a creature it gave me the creeps to embrace.
              1 learned not to think about it. 1 practiced being out of sight of my mind. When catastrophe came to call, 1 would not be in. 1 read bad books and busied myself with masturbation. 1 kept to my room, stayed after school, spent time at the homes of friends, went to movies, dreamed about how, at the back of my closet, beneath the curtain of hanging clothes, there was a secret sliding panel and a freefall of Escher-style stairways, winged, 1 remember, as if they were on loan from Disney . . . goodbye all, goodbye, goodbye.
              My mother was snoring softly, good, my aunt was at work, good, the guys had better get here quick, good and quick. 1 remember frantically begging the fates for such a favor. The ambulance passed the house, wasn't it stopping? but it wasn't the ambulance, I learned, when I went to the window to look out, but the rabbit man’s bread-filled hearse. A stocky sort of guy, his face set in the shape of bewilderment's features, a sap; so keep going, go on past, goodbye, whereupon, answering both prayers, the ambulance turned in, hushed its engine as if its drivers were in no hurry, and soon, sure enough, they very deliberately descended from the van to fetch their long rolled-up sticks from its—
            1 didn’t wait till they bonged the bell; 1 didn't want my mother to wake; I let them in ahead of their arrival; in a conspiratorial whisper, I began to describe the condition, character, and location of their patient; then the telephone rang, and 1 ran to the kitchen to wring its noisy neck.
              It was the hospital. Had the ambulance arrived? 1 would have to come in to make the arrangements. What physician did I want called? How did I know whom to want? didn’t dad have a dozen doctors—to hear him—all bad? He’s been a patient before, I said. So has my mother. Really? Name. 1 said Kohler again, and explained. But the men were there? Yes. Would 1 have the one with the sandy mustache call in? could he use this phone? after he'd certified his load. Certified his load? Did I have a physician 1 wanted called, that was customary, of course they could simply appoint one, but in that case, it would be catch as catch can, all the staff doctors were delightful of course, Dr. Tush was on duty right now, I should make up my mind and let her talk to Fred, the fellow with the sand on his face, Fred the driver of the ambulance, Fred her friend.
              1 went into the living room to find Fred, the friend, and found the boys bearing my mother out the door. Not the one down here, 1 shouted with some exasperation, the one up there, I said, pointing at the ceiling which concealed the room above, where my father lay like a corpse ready for its ritual washing. My shout bestirred mother and, as they were gently lowering the sling, she lurched awake and fell off the stretcher onto the floor. Her nose began immediately
       bleeding. She wants you, Fred. On the phone. The phone’s for you. The phone? Fred said, Gee me? and he stepped over mother in order to get going. She’s on the phone now? gee.
          My mother on her hands and knees watched her nose bleed on the carpet. If not her, who? the other guy asked a little crossly. Like I said, I said, upstairs, in the first bed. Mr. Kohler? who called? My dad. Dead? he wondered. No, I said. Just practicing. I had to help my mother to unsteady feet, and then search for something to staunch her nose. Got a hankie anywhere handy in that ambulance, I asked, just to make conversation. Friend Fred, 1 found out when I went into the kitchen looking for a rag to wrap around an ice cube, was talking to his girlfriend, Jill, because he called her sweetie and said Jill a Jillion times, well Jill, yes Jill, sorry Jill, soon Jill, we’ll do that Jill, we will Jill, when Jill? well, right away Jill, say Jill, are you crying? gee Jill, we will Jill, don’t sweetie, wait sweetie, 1 got to go sweetie, this guy says he needs to use the phone, okay? hey Jill, don’t Jill, no Jill, okay sweetie, pie pie, goodbye. I could have killed him and been knighted for it.
          1 did my best to disremember. file’s light. Ffe don’t bother to weigh much. Down the narrow stairs they bore him just like a body, briefly pausing at the landing to shift hands, keeping him nearly level as they descended by raising one pair of arms while lowering the other set; 1 was sort of impressed. My mother sat insecurely on a hassock holding her nose into a dust rag where I'd wrapped a couple of ice cubes, not, of course, at the edge of one nostril in the strategic place I d told her to put it, having seen kids get kicked playing football, and so on, but managing to mash her face so she couldn’t see him strapped on the canvas like a real member of the deceased, bobrocking slowly down and out the door into a day which had become gray and into a van which was Red Cross-red and sanitation-white with business-blue trim, okay, sign this, so you’ll follow us in, eh? I don’t drive, 1 said. My mother doesn't drive. 1 can see that, Fred said. My aunt isn’t here, I hope, she doesn’t drive either. Oh. My dad does the driving, I said brightly. Yeah. 1 mean he used to do the driving even though he could no longer steer. Yeah? swell, well, you follow us in anyway, they’ll want you at the hospital, somebody needs to take responsibility, and decide and sign and so on. Is that what Jill wants? 1 yelled after the dwindling taillights. Is it Jill s will? is that it?
          In the living room, my mother was back on her hands and knees trying to wipe up the spilled blood or stay its staining with a corner of rag and a residue of cube. 1 can't remember whether cold sets it or unsets it, she said. Everything sets it, 1 said. You don’t know noodles about such things, Billy, stains and the like, blood and such, she said, with a mildness both alert and correct. It certainly surprised me. Blood won’t wash, either off or out, I’ve read, 1 said. You
           were always such a great reader, my mother said; 1 remember how you would read all day on the porch swing, and then come in and read all day in that chair— Not now Peg, Marg, Margaret, mommy, mother. You would, though; we were so proud, your father and 1, watching you sit there, whole hours, nose in a book, fingering your hair, learning about life. I guess I’ve got to go to the hospital to sign dad in. I’ll need to call a taxi for that. Do we have any cash in the house? No ... No cash. No. Nothing. My mother began to sway from side to side. Not a bit. He won’t let me have a cent. Not even for food. I have to beg.
           1 have to cry just to get cream for our coffee.
              I knew the subject of money was a tender one—one, if you knew better, you never touched, sore spot, sure to produce complaints—because my mother hid, in addition to her bottles, money to buy them. And always pretended to be tapped out, desperately in want, strapped like a badly latched trunk, poor as the proverbial church mouse. She squirreled away bills in the damnedest places. Once I found a stash of folding fed in a box designed for playing cards. But she rarely went out anymore, even to the stores or to the bank, and needed her hoard. The breadman was her supplier now. She gave the bastard a carton of cigarettes for Christmas. Well, he fetched her gin in for her, under loaves of mattress dough, and came off in her, too, I don t doubt—god—what a doubtful payment.
              Gin, the cheapest kind, pretending to be London dry, was then distributed among smaller bottles, containers she believed were innocuous and could sit around the house like old friends, unnoticed, permitted, like aspirin bottles and peanut butter jars and mustard pots, even though gin didn’t come in paste or tablet form, and didn’t resemble—at least, to me—a bread spread.
              She gave the fucker a carton of Luckies. That is, she gave me a package wrapped in wreaths and candles to give to him, he wrapped in Bunny blue overalls when his dickie doodad wasn’t hanging out, 1 guess, his name in white stitch just above the pocket—1 looked, it wasn’t Randy—and the question was whether to cut off her supply and let her suffer until she’d found another source, or let the cake company’s visiting cock continue to plug her, so he smiled a smile as tentative, when he saw my look, as a squirrel’s gesture toward a peanut in someone’s proffering hand, and put the carton away with soft and cautious thanks under the loaves of squeezy sandwich bread and goo-slathered Christmas rolls in a spot now empty because he’d already sneaked the gin in in it; since the question was what to do about an addiction (an addiction my father never understood but I knew was necessary), an addiction she needed, not to survive, but to endure survival, since even the curtains in that house hung over every hope the heart had like a scrim of decorated dust, and the days drew the slowest of painful lines, for instance, when my father still went to
       work in the morning, rising like Lazarus, though from a night's life more pitiful than death, stiff in every joint which then had to be released from its rust and moved against its will, while forgoing any easing oil, grimly into underclothing, feet with their painful pullovers, legs into a pair of wide-mouthed trousers soon to be suspended from his frail bent shoulders like a horse’s harness, arms through the sleeves of a plaid shirt made of soft cloth, the whole works covered with suit coat, clothes from an uncrippled time, now never a match; and then, aspinned up, to totter to the head of the stairs where he'd commence his hitchhope and helpstep descent, with frequent rests, and a groan at every riser, a sigh for every tread, the pain rising from his foot’s fall in a shiver to his head, horrible to watch, which was only the beginning, my god, why not a little nip to numb the blows of each brutal day? so the question was whether to throw the fornicator out of the house hurling his Lucky Strikes after him and take away—for a time—her sogdate drunkrape life, or leave her alone to die in her own way, except that her own way proved increasingly unendurable, her mind drifted off course like a floe of ice, she could no longer assist my father down the stairs, someone had to help her, and I would get dad down, and then, miraculously, mum, because she would often pull away suddenly to fall in an unwadding ball like laundry, as if bits of her were landing everywhere, silently, half unconscious when she hitslid the steps.
         I got to hate those stairs, and 1 campaigned to redo the dining alcove so it could serve as my father’s sickroom—we always ate in the breakfast nook anyway an alteration which finally came to pass when he became almost wholly bedridden and couldn’t make it to our single bathroom any longer, even from his bed nearby, so why not relieve himself in a pot behind—say—a modest folding screen and thereby save himself the pain, the bother, the time of the climb, and so on; and save me, too, jesus, because then J’d merely have to land mom and not the whole family plane; although it was also true that my father’s only therapy was his stubborn insistence on going up and down and out and on, so that by the end of a day at work his joints moved when he told them to again, even if, as he said, they didn’t do dance.
         They didn’t do screw, either. Once in a while, I’d bring myself to wonder whether my mother wasn’t simply suffering from a serious loss of love. Perhaps she’d been passionate and needful and now was, in effect, in mourning for deeds of darkness which were no longer ever done; but that was before I found myself in the same situation. Now 1 do what I always did: eat and grow angry at the least thing, call down curses on this or that head, devour a lot of soft cheese, retire to my study, dig into other people’s pasts, write scurrilous verse, conceive worse. I never imagined that the breadman’s amorous pawing could give her any lasting satisfaction. Maybe, for men, a spasm is a spasm, however
           it is brought to pass, but women make love, I've learned, with their longings, their fantasies, as well as their insecurity, and require, if they are to come, dream homes, comfortable bank accounts, and lots of caressing—the kiss of the green as well as the lick of the tongue.
             My mother needed money so she could wet her whistle. She wouldnt spend her grocery allowance on groceries. Hence the broths. I lived like a college student on peanut butter, Kool-Aid, chips, and candy. My aunt brought the candy home—a habit of buying affection which was a hangover from my baby days. Consequently, there wasn’t much to sustain my father’s body, even though it had only its interior business to do: breathing, beating, hurting. My mother didn’t eat either. Pale and powdered, she looked like a bunch of unseparated dinner rolls, but her poor soft being was all bloat and water. She had two expressions—a dreaminess marked by distant petulance, and a wary one which would flip into actual alarm—each always chapped-lipped, wet-eyed, faintly snot-nosed. Her thoughts bobbed back and forth on the wake of her motherly past, as she relived made-up days—or just lies, according to my dad—when she imagined she cooked and partied, or when, as a girl, she wowed them at dances or, with her wisdom, saved many a maiden from making a mistake mistakes which came, it seemed, in only one kind.
             Maybe that explained the breadstud’s attraction; maybe he loved those flour-dusty Parker House dinner rolls.
             At first, my father tried reasoning. He explained at length the dangers of drink. He had stopped drinking himself. (And look how healthy and happy he was, I didn’t dare exclaim.) He had cousins who drank, so he knew; Peg had brothers who hit the sauce and the skids at the same time, so she should know too; worms became petrified in alcohol, hadn’t she heard? the cells of the brain went blank as bulbs; boy, was liquor expensive; she shouldn’t hide her inadequacies behind it, besides it had turned her into a sneak and a liar, she was altering her past in a crazy and shameless fashion, snoozing half the day; what about keeping house? she just sat around and did puzzles, what good, what fun, was that? letting herself go like the end of a rope; what was she so sad and sorry for? there was an entire world to worry about, everybody down on their luck (ten letters, down or across), yet he provided despite the difficult times, didn’t he? no one in the family was in want; she’d better lay off the stuff or he’d kick her out; what example did she conceive she was setting for her sonr they had no social life, didn’t she ever want to get out, see friends, take a trip? but the last trip we’d taken, and it would be the last trip, had included crossing a dry strip of Canada, where Peg felt a foreigner, she said, without familiar sights to reassure her, and she d come down with the shakes during the late afternoon, just about the time we normally started looking for a motel, and I had
      noticed she’d been nervous the entire day, especially after we had gone over the border, growing worse and worse as we drove more deeply into the country, until she began in fear and need, I didn’t know which, to shiver, and try to still a trembling hand with a trembling hand. At that point, I became really alarmed, and argued with my father who insisted on finding, first, a place to stay, which we finally did—thank god, that trip, we didn’t have to deal with my aunt, who'd had enough of our family journeys and wouldn’t travel with us anymore, and had to have her own room, which made finding accommodations all the harder—in a hut behind a filling station—a shack, that’s all you could call it—and 1 was sent out, having rolled my mother in blankets, to find some medicine for mom,” though I couldn’t buy it even if I could find it, shit, I was too young, and then, after an hour of walking up and down the streets of a strange small town, and returning, defeated, to—who knew?—what sort of situation (I cursed the god 1 had no care for, but god damn him anyhow, damn him to . . . what about a rest home in his own hell? red-hot rocking chairs on a cloud of steam), when it was a miracle—I went into the garage where a mechanic was listening to himself gun an engine awheeze with pneumonia, and there I saw half a bottle of scotch on top of a green steel tool cabinet—god, my god, god is good—1 looked at that bottle as if I were a drunk myself, and, near tears, persuaded the guy to part with it ’cause my dad would beat me if I didn't come back to the—the cabin—with something for him to drink, even though he knew this was a dry town and I was underage, so the mechanic sold it to me between zoom-a-cough-zooms for most of my dough, and for a minute I felt almost jolly, what a dunce, forgetting—out of money—for a minute, for mother, what life was, what a dunce, because, back at the—the cabin—things weren’t rosy, my mother was screaming in sort of a falsetto, and jerking about (how many letters? well, remember how the frog’s leg twitched to our surprise during those experimental days back in zoology? so six if Across, seven if Down), my father looking on and listening to her in a frantic fearful fury, he couldn’t hold her Down, his hands were the shape of crabs, they could hook to a steering wheel, thats about all, and the place was so scummy, I had a cold cot in a corner, the bedding was damp, buggy I bet, I really felt sick, and now I started, holding the half-filled bottle out in front of me, to cry from relief, in despair, what a jerk, and my mother stopped, not at the sight of the scotch but at the sound of me, and somehow stilled herself for a second, while I held the bottle for her to swig from, shit, how it leaked over her chin, but she swallowed and swallowed, and shook again, and then swallowed some more, I didn’t think it was going to work, it wasn’t working, too much was spilling, she was shaking again like the chill side of a fever, maybe not so violently, 1 held on, held the bottle, tipping it, her hands now up around it, around mine, in a sort of pose
            of prayer, while the level of scotch dropped, there wasn’t going to be enough, and mother's eyes grew glassy, as if her teary gaze were freezing, and she shuddered some instead of shivering some, and slowly slowed, while I held her hard, harder than the bottle, empty ultimately, she, Peg, Marg, Margaret, mommy, mother, she asleep and snoring.
              Cold-cocked by the scotch.
              After that we thought of the gin as mother’s medicine.
              Not mother’s nemesis. Water of her life. What she couldn’t do without.
              Despite my family training in forgetting, it all came back—those terrible memories did—when she grabbed my hand so desperately while we taxied to the—well, what shall I call it?—to the hospital, asylum, snake pit, nut house, loony bin. Taxied. Jeez. To take a taxi to your death. Just around the next corner, driver, you can’t miss it. It’ll have a porte cochere in front like something fancy, a hotel. And someone like a porter will greet us when we arrive—isn’t that the myth? Hey, if dead, she can say she stiffed the driver. So, little funny guy, who’s going to pay the meter? You, kid? you? Me. Me Me.
              Her hand clasped mine, mine grasped for dear life that goddamn bottle; its green glass held the sloping whiskey, the whiskey, in its turn, clung to its alcohol as only a chemical can; the alcohol, okay, hung on to its effect, which, in the long run, was the habit which gripped my mother, and made her shiver for it, and seize me, so that, like spent swimmers, we all went under, we all drowned, went woody like that intoxicated worm the teacher of temperance held up for the class to gasp at—actually she dipped worm after worm in the clear waterlooking liquid, so we could each snap one in half like a dry twig—and experience for ourselves the consequences of a drunken wormy snap-in-half life.
              I knew, in that hospital, my mother would shake and scream. All right. Perhaps she would only moan. I tried to tell myself it would be for the best if both of my parents were put away. My aunt was yet another fruitcake. The two of us together could not take care of an unopened can of corn. It would be best this way, it would be, and oh, indeed, it was: the house was quiet; empty for most of the day, it stored up silence, and spent it in the evening when I would lie like a length of silk ribbon in the crack of a book, and read the way the famished eat, almost wildly for a while, and then slowly as though the words made up my cud. It was accomplished; they were gone for their good and I was glad; the house was quiet; there was a calm to its objects which involved more than their sitting in their customary situations—which is nearly all they did anyway—because they had to feel their release from the accidents of ill or drunken ownership deep in their braces, slats, and naps, as if the dust they continued to collect was no longer the dust of indifference or of slovenliness, it was silence’s sand, and so was suitable to the quiet light which fell now
      through afternoon windows, and the hush which hung like another drape where their stuff stood as a sentry stands in watchful place: like my father's things racked in the hall closet, his gangsterish felt hat, his pot, too stored, his trays, and cane, and chair pushed into a corner, waiting for the day of his death, whence their removal, dispersal, and sale; since, when the sounds of such a sad life went, when the pain, the acrimony, which contrasted with his calm, departed, they didn’t go away for a week’s vacation, a trip taken for their health; they were sounds doomed, nevermore to be made, as the poet says no more piss hiss in the pot, or the carpeted tap of my father’s cane, his soft groans. I always thought, like rotting fruit, and the small sniffs and elongated sighs my mother emitted like something on low heat, or the radio tuned to Jack Beany or the voice of my father talking back to the news, the special rattle, I remember, of his paper, as he wrestled to refold its pages, the snip of his reading light coming on in the dusk, water running in the kitchen sink, the scuff of my mother’s slippers over the linoleum which told me if she was enough to fix dinner, the click of the cards she played, and the sound of their shuffle when we die what we do dies; good or ill, both lose their patron; when we leave our house, our place of life, however sordid, what we did there leaves, and the rooms we occupied—insulted, misused—breathe, as though in and out a different lung, another atmosphere; yes, I had forgotten that fact that when ma and pa, father, mother, me—when we die what we do dies. What a loss! what a never matter! what a mercy! " ^ i
        I would have to visit her in her hospital. I would have to visit him in his. I was only fifteen, god damn it, why did I have to visit him in his hospital, her in hers. Oh horrible, I knew, hers would be, the bonkers in their barnyard. But first I would work one of her crossword puzzles. There the book was cracked flat in a scatter of crumbs, idle on the breakfast table, pencil nub resting in it, ready to do a definition: Lascivious look. I always thought these word games went backward. How much more interesting it would be if 11 Down were: leer, fourteen letters. And I hated—it was unfair—21 Across: Running comb, form, five. That wasn’t a word. Combining forms weren’t words. Aero- wasn't a word. Nor was ‘woe,’taken out of'won,'one. Or the deliberately mean defs like 47 Across: Ymir’s Audhumia, three letters, no doubt each queer friends, the same old hats, the Essenes, for instance, as the answer for 14 Down: Ancient ascetics. On the other hand, fame would be finding yourself asked for: Nobelist for peace, 1934; Long-distance runner, two words; Drunken Irish poet; Another name for traitor, eleven letters, aha, don’t need hint or help, I have it: Billy Kohler. ^-7-r
                    I had to taxi. I’ve hated taxis my whole life. 1 sit there fearing I've not got enough for the fare; that I’ll be overcharged, dropped in the wrong place, won't
            know what to tip; that I’m weak or I'd walk, inept or impoverishefffir I’d dive myself; I know I'll be forced to talk baseball or sometimes even pcfiBcs, alw ays the weather, and where are you from? son? Embarrassed, too, abrot my destination, ashamed of my home’s address, will it be found? w 11 the cai jffive when it should? will it go where it’s been told? Like telegrams they He in sorrow, sickness, or death. I know because that’s what I think when I see th im roof-lighted like cops, draw up at anyone else's house. Only t le ambulance is worse. Or the Bunny Bread Truck . . . with Bunnies Abounding. -f
               1 think when I first saw my mother working those puzzles, I thatijht the words had to be connected at a level deeper than their spelling 1believe ere had to be some message which wrestling with those clues unlock ed--a jnadm of conduct, a forecast of the future, a friendly warning—otheiwite vdiy wcuE anyone bother with 31 Down, Treatises on animals, or 31 A:ra;s, eitier Dandy’s partner. The satisfaction of simply figuring out something essential!) silly (knowing what 6 Down, Grounded at Oxford, meant), this jldisulre permanently escaped me; but my mother, who could no longer gjve to voids in> consecutive sense, put hours of concentrated study into the neaninj(of tEi:se for her, mostly unfunctional, signs (what do you call—in six !ett;rs—a na ive Hawaiian?), because they occupied her mind with innocent ahd disc on lected ideas—so I supposed—though when I am obsessed, everythipg ;peal« to me of my idee fixe: how about 22 Across, Heart of the matter? then 2c, f as the
            willies? and 27, next, it’s one of those fill-in-what’s-blank,_____^compos
            mentis?
               Non. Okay. ’Non’ is right. Three square boxes. For NON. lEri e tees in the letter hive. I waited in a little room with a great big table in it surre under b) chairs, so there was scarcely space to squeeze by. I had to decide w *erz to sit (was there a significance in that?), and then cant the chairs a bit one’Ey on ? to get past: sure, the arrangement meant that sudden movement were impossible. There were two doors, the one I’d come through, and anothe ; at the othei end on the same side. I didn’t know which to watch. There was liothifig idse there but the shining surface of the table, nearly as wide and loir 5 as thp fbor as if the floor, in fact, had risen to the height of one’s thighs [wasTtliere seme significance in that?). Up, inches, 35?                                ____
               1 Across (let’s begin at the beginning, show some system, demon >trs te discipline), 1 Across is what? Moonlighter’s second job. Shit. Id's one, two. three . . . eight letters long. Nothing immediately comes to mindl Try 1 Dawn then, Fudgelike candy, that should be easy, only seven. A handheld the! unentered door open. Couldn't I figure out anything? 7 Down, Not on? past: wcuI3 that be ’lately’? ‘recent’? neither was the right size, five. A voice scicEItHd! right, you can go in. 1 recognized her: it was 25 Down, Confidant aF iel ier.
      Who said again: It's all right, you can go in. And my mother entered wearing her starchy tent. She couldn’t have hairpins; she couldn’t own a comb. Her gray hair was even scrubbed of its customary soil and consequently drifted about in every direction. I remembered then how fine her hair had been. 23 Down was six letters and meant Beauteous place. 1 couldn’t answer any, get one. Oh ves 1 had, I d gotten NON. Her wifely white face, when she stopped, was reflected in the table. She was unable to manage the chairs. With the help of 25 Down she fell into the first one she came to. That put us eight or nine letters apart. 1 never had much luckw'ith long words. She sort of looked at me. I think she felt ashamed to be in the bin, in this room full of table, to be dressed as she was. her hair as connected to her head as a cloud to a peak. But then I realized that the strange configuration of her face was due to the absence of teeth—a bridge I didn't even know about had been removed. No belts, pins, jewelry, cosmetics, teeth. This was a place in which she was supposed to get better? They probably didn’t provide a mirror. She could only feel how her unkempt tent concealed her, and how her lost teeth added hollow corners to her mouth. She could feel it if she had an ego left to feel with, because all vanity was in vain here, where they collected every shred of self-respect as if it were
      evidence of evil, since, if you were to retain any, you might become suicidal_
      combs, pins, teeth, were lethal. The Wagnerian earth goddess was 54 Across. Ersa, Erde,' who? I hate it when they want you to know myths or music. My mother, alas, was neither. 1 thought she’d lost weight or water, but maybe it was just the teeth. Her eyes still swam in some sort of liquid. 1 asked her several inconsequential things. It occurred to me, absurdly, that she would probably know 39 Across, Devices for inducing ram. A question like that might produce an answer. Catch her by surprise. Give her an alertness. Instead I said I'll bring you a comb next time I come. Can’t have a comb, she said. I might kill myself if 1 had a comb. Is that you, Billy?
              My mother must have played thousands of hands of solitaire, though they were mostly the same kind of game, one of the classic forms, I was given to understand; and I thought of this occupation, too, as mysterious, a kind of fortune-telling. Occult questioning was curiously for women only. A man in a black suit would suddenly—this or that—appear, become significant in your life. The king of clubs. What the jack of spades said was always vague. Warnings were a staple, for what could one do with the future but fear it? Women in red. Temptations of all types. The falseness of friends—how was it put?— the treachery of someone close to you. Well, my mother had betrayed my trust by letting my father bully her and by becoming a drunk. Later I would learn to look out for the queen of spades. Pique dame. Dark lady. Madame la Mort. I betrayed my mother by misleading her to the madhouse. I found out that my
             mother frequently cheated at crosswords by checking solutions in the back of the book, and at solitaire by peeking under piles of cards which were supposed to remain facedown until an up card was legitimately removed. I could never figure out the rules. My father betrayed all of us by allowing my mother to kill herself in this slow liquidly way. My mother said her bridge had broken during shock. She shook loose from the straps, too, she said, with a suggestion of pride in the spacing of her voice. Shaking seemed to be the thing death did in my life. DTs had probably aided her in that, I privately thought. My aunt tried to take over the rule of the house, not through a coup but by profiting from the prolonged attrition of a weak wife’s weak estate. What the hell—we all connived. So would she be seeing a dentist, 1 asked, to get her bridge repaired? She didn’t shake at this, she shuddered. What's the diff? the number of letters? Okay. She became animated by her distaste for the dentist. Not a chance of me seeing such, her shiver said. A shudder is one square stronger. I'll bring you a comb next time I come. I don’t have to comb my hair in here, my mother said. Her statement was unusually clear and direct. She understood something. The matron, nurse (who knew her definition?), an attendant made of stiff white paper, signaled, so 1 rose, made my apologies—try profuse excuses,’ the right length—received only a withdrawal symptom in reply, and stumbled slowly through the space between the chairs, as inept as if 1 ought to be a patient, overcome by the conviction that someday I would be one: l would be sent away to some asylum on the pretext of a friend; I’d be packed in a cab, slackmouthed and dull-eyed, and arrive combless, unkempt, compulsively pulling on my cock in a corner.
              The breadgoon, who usually stopped his fucktruck in the street, drew into the driveway like a taxi big as life, like an ambulance, a moving van, legitimate delivery man. And was soon standing on the front stoop with neither loaf rack, shitty smile, Christmas cig in sappy mouth, nor pack of Bunny buns in hand.
           1 said, Yes? 1 saw the am-bu-ah-lance, he said, is someone sick? Sure. We are.
           I actually answered ... 1 answered ... My dad. He wouldn’t speak until I said My dad. He wouldn’t move until 1 said My dad. Oh, sorry. I was worried. The shit said. The shit said: 1 was worried it was your mother. Said the shit. To think I’d given him those Lucky Strikes. The shitbreadgoonfuck. Stick around, I said. She goes next.
              And did.
        Mother would elaborately lay out the cards. In a carefully even row unlike her nature. 1 remember her hands, always dry and cracked. The red nails she mispolished—flaked too, rough, dirt-packed, riven—would tip the pasteboards over, flick them flat, and then they would be ceremoniously placed upon the table—clat—that was the sound, 1 think—clat. She would hold the remaining
        cards, the play-from pack, in her left hand, which was steady because it would be at least midmorning when she began play and she was therefore numerous reassuring nips into the day, her nails running around the small stack like a blunted picket fence; then she would slowly squeeze one from the top with her thumb and, tipping, study it; she would study its face, as if it had said something ambiguous, before finding a place for it to play, which often meant making changes in the general configuration of the cards, requiring movements in the serially numbered rows and commonly colored fans—how? why?—accompanied by sighs of satisfaction or moues of dismay—what was the issue? why the distress?—you always lose at solitaire, she said, smiling a rare, mother-made smile: crosswords are never completed, only given up, and card games like these are never won; that's why I play them.
        Later, of course, I made a wholly romantic connection between her timeeating activities and my own weight, between staring at the cards and this scribbling I do at night—head-hunting for a word, hoping for a heart, peeking to locate an ace, and, by staring, penetrating previously driven holes in a drunken dark afraid to sleep because when you slept you were no longer alone; and knowing loneliness like a spouse, as if it were simply the only condition of life, however unfriendly, however ugly and hard; hating loneliness, yet fearful of anything else but loneliness, having been disappointed—the word is too weak—at every social turn: no longer going out, attending church, having dinner parties, playing bridge with friends; and as your husband’s illness becomes his new profession and your household tank nears empty and you fail to find a function that isn’t merely a filler like a spare tire’s air, waiting to be wanted and of use until you’ve lost all inner pressure; well, you have a little nip now and then, what harm? it’s small expense, you've saved a bit on duds since you don’t have any need or interest in pretty clothes, no one looks at you with desire, or touches you with pleasure, or talks to you as if you might be amusing, or finds it fun to be in your presence, or delights in your appearance, or compliments you on your looks, or wit, or skill with food or figures, facts or fucking, so you have a pick-me-up now and then, just to jolt the spirits, merely to erase a little melancholy when it comes on in the middle of a morning, when you've already peeny-buttered everybody’s lunch, and there’s no friend to phone, so why bother to watch your weight or wash or read books or plan for the future, the future is your enemy, only the past can be stood, because the past is thank god dead, perhaps a little toast to that, all those increasingly gloriously golden days, when your breasts were young, and you thought, I can do that, and then did it, possibly a small swallow to honor the old ways, hair of the dog, as they say, though you remember you didn’t keep up with your French or your tennis, and had you—had you—had you—what would life have been?
          well, so what, now—clat—because, when no one is tender to you, what’s the use—red nine on the black ten—and when you are in that state of superfluity, no one will love you, you can count on that—clat—so let your cunt look out for itself—uncover the queen—breasts are no business of yours—is every play-blocked?—may health and life and its illusions of point and purpose make their own propaganda, because what you learn, the wisdom you have, when the gin has brought you to a state dismal enough to discern it, is that solving a crossword is better than being pawed and bedded, mounted and knocked up and having a baby, because you can do it alone, nobody cares il you fail, no one envies your success, no one troubles your nose with the bad breath of their being, no one hates you for letting them fuck you or bringing them into the world, no one curses you for your kindness to them, no one bothers you, unlike husbands or younger babies, because babies are slavery, and you can lie on the rug of your living room, in the warm yet cooling puddle of your pee or monthly bleed or sniveled tears, all day—kid gone, sis gone, old man off in his own pain—all day without causing trouble, because who needs the trouble, who needs it? because if you can’t live your own life, you can at least die on your own grim terms, and give people a lot of satisfying misery while you re doing it.
Argh . . . here it is: another day. I was instantly alert, well ahead of my alarm, the way 1 would wake in the army, early as those long faint shadows which make the ground seem unshaven. Ding dong bell, 1 thought, searching for the reflection of my psyche in the washed-out walls. Willie’s not so . . . hot. An anxious mind reviewed my schedule. There was nothing momentous coming up, nothing special, just routine appointments and classes like post-lunch yawns, another day My god, 1 thought. It has begun.
               The ends of my fingers were still sore, dirt and ink in my prints, though I’d coated them with Vaseline and worn cotton gloves like a pajama bandage while I slept my disturbed sleep. The ends of my eyes were tender, too, hurt by the hard walls which repelled any study. Oil the instrument, I'd thought, working finger into finger as if 1 had the surgeon's concern for sterility. Glove covers love, and grease will ease its passage. I’ve inherited my mother's hands, my father’s outlook, my own disagreeable digestion. Dawn, damn, has rosy ones, damn. damn. damn, another day. Argh . . . Isn t that the thing to say?
OUTCAST ON THE MOUNTAINS OF THE HEART
         What book am 1 to serve up to my students? what law lay down to rule my kids? what of mankind's food for thought is on my menu? With feet socked against the cold floor, 1 searched my drawers for a warm shirt. A congealing wind would make the classroom a long ride away. The wind was in the light, thinning it, cooling it to a crust. Deep in the earth, say in a cave, the climate moderates. Weather is nearly no more. Animals and insects become bright. Dawnless down there. Shine where there’s nothing to show.
         Up here, we had history: mom and dad and dog. or. mom dog and dad. a rearrangement of the same arrangement. The dictator died. The State decayed. Breadlines wound around the block. Whores dropped their prices. Tents were pitched in parks. The comics featured Apple Mary.
                                 The Beggar’s Song
                       Sunburned, wet,
                       I go from door to door till my right ear rests in its also hand.
                       Then I hear a voice I’ve never heard.
                       My cries, if they’re mine, slip thinly through my fingers.
                       I grieve over trifles, though my words ask for more than yesterday’s cake.
                       It’ll take two eyes to close my face so it lies like a book in my open palm, its look resigned, released, lines no longer long.
                       It says: at least, if I’m unfed,
                       I have a place to put my head.
       Whores took their clients to cheaper hotels. Soup was served in Episcopal basements. Men lived in cartons beneath bridge abutments. So the State decayed and the dictator was slain. The dictator was slain and soup was served, whores sucked their clients as though cocks were straws, and worry wound its shabby line around the block, O bitter reminder, mom died and dad dogged, don't forget.
               One day, someday, there’d be day no more. I would have sat up in bed for the last time, startled by the light, neither I, nor anything I felt, aware that we and the premises were parting: same old rug, familiar floor, cold dark hall, frosted panes, the final taste of toothpaste—to you, minty blue goo, I bid a posthumous goodbye, and then to the click of little latches, and the pop of toast, so long, but no one says “Ah, farewell, friend to the doorknob, out of ignorance, in fear of being right, hating adieus. Let’s get this over with, I thought. My god, going nowhere is nothing much. Leaving this light is not a lot of loss. Okay, I declared to the coated window, let’s go and see your boss. My snigger was like a shiver through a drink. If I am alive, I don’t want to wake. Sleep on, O ship of state. To be alive without living, that’s the ticket. Move all "said and dones” into tomorrow, all “all overs” up one break. I don’t want to see the light like my skin’s own pallor on the wall again. I don’t want to feel condemned by an unknown certainty. 1 don't want to be anxious anymore. I will will myself witless if this goes on. Dawn to dawn. I don’t want to think.
                                            The Idiot’s Song
                              They don’t stop me. I go as I go.
                              They say nothing can happen to one as me.
                              I ho ho. I tee hee.
                              How good. I go. I’m free.
                              I swing myself round and round this pole, the pole of the human spirit.
                              I don’t know, so go as I go.
                              It’s great. I’m fate. I’m me.
                              If I cut my wrist there’d be no risk,
                              I’d never reach where the blood flows, going as it goes like liquid ice.
                              Not me. I’m free. It’s nice.
                              Oh, there’s a lovely ball going roll, red and round as everywhere is, just as god gets round by rolling his.
                              And I go whee. Nice me.
                              How odd all that’s even always is, running together, flying apart, putting the go before the cart.
                              H’s fate. That’s great. Whoopee.
                      That’s what they call my unspoiled condition, when I premonH a premonition.
                      For knowing nothing lets me see.
                      Ho ho. I’m free. No shit. Tee hee.
        I left poetry for history in my youth. A terrible turning. I’ve no excuse. I could have pressed harder. Put the point down upon my paper with more exalted purpose. Perhaps, then, a poem would have written its indented way onto the next page. No, that s inexact. 1 tried as hard as any archer to have an aim, overhear a calling. 1 remember the effort, the resolve to be high-minded, the sober choice of models; 1 remember reading only what would do my genius good, the straining for greatness; and 1 remember watching every word I wrote unravel like a poorly knitted sleeve. My rhymes clanged predictably, my meters were military, my metaphors fled the mind like frightened mice, assonance sent good sense to sleep, and though my alliteration was lively, its lilt always arrived on the wrong night, trilling when despair was my so-called subject, hissing when there was actually nothing to fear, peppering pages which had planned on being bland with a sudden seasoning, mumbling when the night was supposed to be clear.
        If days are different, darks are different too. Lying at length in my tube, smelling the grave we used to go to—dust or ashes, which do you desire, my dear?—in the thin round nothing 1 have carved, l—more and more now— rest as if tumescent, like a snake, swollen, digesting everything that living s swallowed, my rotting body rotting beneath its rotting clothing, my modest bones blushing at what they will reveal, and what the world would understand if it understood bonespeak, since the soft glands have another language—liver, lungs, brain's pale blossom, or the heart—for hearts don't break, what a miscription! hearts burst, or leak, or sag, or sour on themselves, mainly hearts seep, but bones, bones sliver, bones crack, bones snap, lungs are breath and spirit, but bones are regimen and order, and when I lie there in my hole I imagine that’s what's rising to my buried surface, I'm becoming bug, turning turtle, and instead of lung or liver, then, hanging like a washrag from a rib, my threaded bones will control, conceal, and skeletize my consciousness—me in my words—so if they, those explorers of the dirt, were to dig me up one day while searching for a city, they'd find a jaw, some teeth, and well inside its grin, my ill humor like an atmosphere, a final fart ol feeling.
        But every dark is different. Some darks may be boundless, stratospherical, pure, but 1 prefer mine circumscribed as a corset, and where, if 1 had a soul, it would be squoozen, and where, when I’m found, I’ll be identified as the remains ol a child, doubled over, waiting to be born.
                                            The Dwarf’s Song
                             My soul may be large and full, as they say,
                             as good as any and as pure,
                             but my heart is a withered pippin,
                             the tree it felt no falling from
                             no taller than a worm,
                             a worm with no room in the pippin to turn.
                             Nor will anything happen to my hands to unharm them—stunted, blunt, bewildered—hopping heavy and damp after every task like little toads, which they claim
                             make warts, those warts on my nose where no dinner smell or perfume goes.
                             God must hate my misshapen feet with their bent toes,
                             my disgraced face with its ballocky jowls, for when my soul smiles my features slobber, and nothing has ever come close enough to me to kiss or sniff or watch where my eyes cross, the way big dogs do who slobber too, and couldn’t care less how either of us looks. I I
               I felt immortal longings. At what age? Had I read Thomas Mann and then felt immortal longings? Or the reverse. Tossed in my tiny room like a ship in a storm. That would be Conrad. Turned into a cartoon creature. That would be Kafka. Paced the walls. Dreamed. Let myself fly out a window. Soar over painted seas. Be Peter Panned. Yet of the world ... of the world, 1 knew maps. Lagoons were blue. 1 leafed through magazines. Native boobs were brown. Perused several standard histories. Caesar bled on the capitol steps Everything 1 read went straight to my head. Nothing was enough. Not even immortal longings. Played with myself. Pined. Entertained longings which didn't know their names. Knew 1 was a wid, a nasty little kid, my cock's collar so tight it couldn’t breathe. 1 felt ashamed, ashamed for it. Hid in the page. I ransacked Golden Treasuries for proof of my taste, verification of my melancholy, in order not to feel alone, in order, in addition, to feel unique, and, although empty as a sack, to learn to look
       full, act fat, weigh like something serious on the mind. 1 vowed not to repeat only . . “only . . in front of every good thing given to me: “only toast. . “only money . . "only happiness . . “only a song . . “only a scratch . . "only a rose . . .” I went about looking for life as if it were a glove I’d lost and I were Alice's rabbit late for a date. As a consequence, all I enjoyed was the shallow self-absorption of youth: 1 saw nothing but myself seeing, heard nothing but myself breathing, found nothing but the discarded wrapper of my own conceit, felt nothing genuine except concealment. The handicapped, especially the blind, the hungry and infirm, are often driven like stakes into their own hearts. Unmaimed, not in pain or aged, my eyes were nevertheless turned up toward the top of my head as though I were most at home in a faint.
                                     The Blind Man’s Song
                        I’m blind. You there. That’s a curse.
                        My daily calamity:
                        to wake up to nighttime. There’s no worse.
                        I put my hand on a person passing, lay my gray claim on her gray straight arm.
                        We go through a clamorous grayness then as though it were a goal to cross a street.
                        You like to think your feet
                        sound differently on different stones?
                        Only my tick alternates the pavement
                        and outgroans all the dark,
                        as if my gut were walking or my heart.
                        Recognize the tunes? You never sang them as this stick leads, or to this beat.
                        Every day the bright dawn comes to greet you, warms your face when you wake to feel it.
                        Hey. You there. Make no mistake.
                        Staring isn’t caring.
               Poets are neither born nor made nor found in a field like the ash of a fallen star. There are no poets, there are only poems. But in my youth I wished to be a poet. Then I might write poems. Beneath a tree. On flyleaves. I would breathe them down necks shaped like swans or like similes; I would sing them to empty skies and cause larks. I would wear my hair long, wind ribbons round
              my throat, lounge in gardens, affect TB, smoke incessantly, drink something green. Yes, how to be a poet, that was the problem.
              Girls liked poets. Why? They didn’t like poetry. They liked the idea of poetry, they liked boys who sounded sensitive, soft as themselves, malleable; they were sentimental, girls were, desiring the valentine life and someone to share it; so I went about ardently contriving poetic moods, seeking relief for the dreams of my imprisoned self, looking for basins to piss my passions in. Posturing like a puppet. Putting on airs, adopting poses and opinions, dancing the Of Ez, the Oscar Wilde Waltz, reading Huneker and Huxley, chanting Wolfe and Whitman, rehearsing GBS’s scornful jibes, while on no account venturing the heroic closure of a single couplet. It would have been more sensible to die and come back as Hart Crane. That's the guy I wanted to be, and write poems which climbed the empyrean like a Balthasar Neumann stair, although then 1 didn't know what such a stair should be, or even if I could fancy sailors. Still,
            1 knew gloom, and had read The Sorrows of Young Werther.
              Now I first fancy a hole and then crawl in and there pretend to die, only to be dug up again just in time to let loose one last opinion, to expire as I’ve lived, like a worm, by eating earth.
              I had also read of youthful athletes, full of pride and power, who slipped on a piece of soap and broke their backs in the bath, waking from this one ungainly goof in a padded, stainless chair, their beautiful bodies bent for good like spoons, their hairy chests and splendid cocks no more admired, their feats forgotten now' that repetition was no longer possible—the irony and pity of it, glory gone, renow-n gone, the exuberance of the body lost, and the enjoyments of its feats, its triumphs, its dauntless skills, quite dampened, the promise God had given when He’d endowed those muscle-making genes with their genius, withdrawn upon the slip of a soapy heel—so I felt I had also fallen, and broken my spirit somehow' in my fall, because my outlook might venture optimistically outw'ard for a moment, my attitude might be a mirror of admiration,
            1 might reach with relish for a bit of life, when suddenly my tone would take an inw'ard turn, my thoughts be only on the shortcomings of my situation, self, companions, and our aims, my attitude soured like stored milk, and I w'ouid deride my own decisions, seek in every public pose its pubic cover, find ambition ridiculous, achievement absurd, rewards vain, satisfactions callow, coarse and simple-minded, cuddy as a cows.
         Yes, I had begun life with the poet’s outlook, in the celebrational mode, for the poet cannot do otherwise than praise, even if, in a momentary slough of despond (w'here so many poets choose to dwell—where the housings ample, costs are down, maintenance is minimal), he thinks of ending his miserable life; because his words will credit even that, and raise his suffering to the level
        of the reader’s repeated delight, even as the poet drops like Dante did into hell's fires and doom's despair, not a bit daunted by the devil, ready to turn the impermanence of great pain into a monumental phrase; for it is true that the skillful depiction of the superficial can possibly be profound, the stupid can amuse us, the unfortunate inspire, and there is no purer pleasure than that of the tragic; then smile at the paradox, and recollect how we enjoy contemplating death if we are reading Sir Thomas Browne, or dream of doing a Chatter-ton while perusing Gerard de Nerval.
                                 The Suicide’s Song
                      One more moment to endure, though they stilt hack my rope, hating my denial of the rules, my hate of hope.
                      A tug ago I was so prepared, my bowels moved, their stools already stiffened by eternity.
                      I know life is a full spoon, sweetness trembling round its lip, which others swallow with some success; but me it sends to bed as if the proffered sip were sickness not its cure.
                      Let me vomit and leave the lickings in the street.
                      One taste will take 1000 years to diet.
              The pedestrian viewpoint now in vogue insists that you become a poet by writing poems. How else did Rilke become the author of the Duino Elegies or these songs which 1 enjoy double-crossing? Suppose 1 set to work, how should I do it? I could versify a lifetime and not achieve a line worth stoning. But composition is a matter of touch and go, give and take, trial and error, this theory forlornly argues. Having twiddled some disgraceful twaddle, the twiddler will spot the twaddle hiding in the brush, singing its shy and hesitant song, and say,
              with a shout of recognition, “Twaddle1” But twiddlers don't spot twaddle; that's why they are twiddlers; it's well known. And how in the worn round world can I, having written twaddle after twaddle, have the forewit to correct it? Haven’t my habits worn a trench for me higher than my head? Ah, this dim point of view weakly replies, 1 borrow my standards from the poets I have read, and that’s how 1 recognize my twaddle as twaddle, and that's how 1 learn to correct it—my twaddle in time and due course resembling twuddle, perhaps, the twuddle of the poets 1 prefer.
               Okay. Determined to be a poet, let's suppose 1 spill a quill or two of meretricious slop in the notebook which shall eventually announce my divinity; but then 1 stop, I see its meretriciousness, 1 am appalled by its noxious nouns and sluggish pace, so I alter my previous wording, 1 scoop out the spoiled parts, add an elegant allusion, slip in an archaic term. All is well now—well, no—now I notice how wretched my central phrase is, and cancel several deadly repetitions, I adjust my trimeters, latinate my diction just a smidge, improving all I’ve done as a good poet should, learning as 1 go, refining what I’ve got, smoothing myself and my couplets with every rub of this eraser—but my god, how? if I’m not a Milton, my genius gleaming and garrulous, how do I see what’s wrong, how do I improve it, how do I profit by the process? The jerk writes jerkily like an auto riding on a flat. There’s no useful air in that, no matter the poet’s puffing. He may be skillful, maybe not, but the skillful alone are laughingstocks. The paradox is cruel. And 1 began back then, having struck one attitude as repeatedly as a lamppost, to understand it: poets are neither born nor made nor found in a field like the clinker of a meteor.
        Okay. A person we shall call a poet puts a sound down the way one sets a teacup in its saucer, puts a thought down the way one does an act of desperation and regrets it, puts a passion in its place like pennies in a pocket only to find gold coins when he withdraws them later with the same indifferent fist that first let those pennies drop; oh yes, transmutes as if he were magician, as if he knew what presto meant; though there never was a person (whether called a poet) who could place syllables like silverware at will around a table, place platters like glistening ovals of shining celebration—no, these plates aren't wet: lay platters like gleaming ovals of celebration—no, overripe: lay platters like ovals of celebration—no, these plates aren't platters: lay plates like circles of celebration—no, you may "lay" a platter, but you don’t "lay" a plate: put out plates like glistening circles of celebration—no, thought I'd got rid of glistening': put down plates like shining circles of celebration—no, we don't "put" tables, we “set” them: set plates like shining circles of celebration, and have these sounds draw the guests meant to make their music: you mean? I mean the mouths meant to devour them, my dear, the tongue and teeth swimming in a
         sea of spit, the callous jaw, its indifferent hinge, the cheek's softly stretchable flesh, the mouth s tender lip forming a line like the softest sex . . .
         History cannot be revised and requires no pronunciation. Only the history of history has that advantage, as Mad Meg so often said. Done, it’s done. Living is doing, and dying is what it does; but writing . . . writing is hiding from history, refusing to do any dying . . . writing is lying ... in wait . . .
         Just like this I would be carried away into catastrophe, again and again into bathetic excess and ruinous derision. Culp kept me company, his doggerel at heel, even in those early days before f knew to say his name. And that was the solution, of course. Culp wrote the doggerel I wrote. It signified his presence, that self-disgusted section of my soul, which saw through all, and saw it was cheap, saw it was chipped, saw it was plastic, saw it was pink. (Dull dawn today like an erased slate.) Though it was Herschel, often, who read what Culp wrote, or Governali who heard what Culp spouted. And brusquely canceled or corrected him.
                Poor Herschel. Thus have I always invoked him. Herschel honey. Mocked him. Poor poor Herschel. He always made me feel starry-brained. Now, pale as his sheet, he pees through a tube and dies in a hospital. Who had he hurt? And Governali 1 gather has taken a job at—I can't believe—Yale, where his daughter’s taunts will not—he feels—pursue him, her past catch up with his. His motto: By our success we prove a failure. Planmantee is pouting. Keeps aloof from us louts and our simpleton standards, we—that is, me—molesters of maidens, we—that is, me—sly office fornicators, me the friend of Fascist thought; and he mourns the loss of his old lady, who left him no doubt for a less pompous, less anal and measured life; he sorrows over an irreparable tear in his checkered knickers. Culp says 1 should say: sheds a tear for the unrepairable tear; but Herschel holds out a quieting hand to me, grasps my arm halfway up its sleeve: Complete your book, he says, but have more sympathy for the man who wasn't in the street; who watched with bewilderment while the world growled on and hunted its prey; who peered past a curtain and bit his tongue; w'ho feared for his family and expected the worst; who merely wanted to get on; who couldn’t cope with high principle or low company either; who hurt his fellow man out of his own hurt and not out of his heart—who is that, I ask Herschel, have you found such a jelly-centered villain?—finish your book, but do not hate us because you aren't perfect or the world is unimprovable; because wrongs can't really be righted; injustice lingers on like a congestion in the lung, waiting for reinfection; do not despair because there is no cure, for there is no cure, no cure for any of it; there’s no stopping the fall of man, but at least we all fall along with one another—ah, you are so right, Herschel, over your bedded body 1 fling your own rough comfort: weep for your
                own death, yes, yet remember the same fate will come to claim the others (nurses, doctors, visitors, those dot-gray TV figures, the guy in the adjoining bed whose prolonged coughs keep you in the middle of your misery all night), that should make you smile, it makes me grin deep in my gizzard, it gives me the courage to go on to the end; the democracy of death ensures the only evenness there is; and it will happen that the rich man will sicken and his well-paid physicians miss his diagnosis, that the powerful man will be shot while lying on the public’s wife, that the well-endowed will weaken in their old age and piss along their leg just as you have, that the brilliant will dim into querulous senility, and beauty bite the dust, criminals be eaten by dumpyard rats, and even Adolf at the last be quite burned up.
                I saw that. At twelve or fourteen. On the day I rejected religion. 1 saw that death is Ultimate Justice. 1 saw that it all works out. I was a fast fifteen maybe. With the clarity of a kid's eye. “Deserts of Doom" was the infelicitous result. 1 gave up trying to celebrate Thanksgiving by rhyming ‘turkey' with ‘turnkey,’ and 1 abandoned my rhapsodical ode in praise of "The Mothers of America and the World" (one of my early Whitmanesque works) in mid-paean, as well as a moody tale entitled "Hope's Last Cabin" (in time to Poe's melodious drug-induced music). And did "Deserts of Doom” in cowardly couplets.
                I didn’t understand then (1 wasn’t as quick as the slick brown fox) that poetry was the inside of history, was the interior of the text, was the present alive in what had passed, was what sustained itself through every change of tense. If the poet wonders where yesterday’s snows have gone, he is really mourning the melting of the drift he’s standing in, feeling the cold claim his soggy shoes; the dust that closed Helen's eye is irritating his lids, dimming the view of all he loves; and the Byzantium he believes in, so far away in past time’s legendary space, is being built in his head by his own scribbling hands, for all who read him to hold in theirs.
              So 1 was slow to realize how poetry created a permanent and universal present like a frieze of stone, and was therefore what any one of us might see and feel who followed its lines and felt its forms: it was the oil for all ills, didn’t the poets claim? the salt of sadness in every tear, artful fence for the stolen kiss. Poetry was not merely what stood in front of your eye like a palace guard (for poetry believes in nothing but the reenactment of its rituals), it was those eyes, their pupil’d core, the scene itself. True poems constitute Kingdoms, Kingdoms of Last, Lost, and Little Things. The true poem is a community of words formed from the clutter of life, and by virtue of its ceremonies the true poem confers citizenship on all the modest items which cover, for instance, a work-torn desk like mine with their concerns: car keys, copper coins, sulfur-colored legal sheets, small gray wires strung from silent black machines, paste, clips,
            bands, pens, paper cups and calling cards, each item, ever)' name, shifting as necessary to stand for or be replaced by another set of office sit-abouts: that tightly rubbered stack of mail too meaningful to me to answer, a tattered memo-note-and-doodle pad tracked with tele numbers and appointment dates, paper punch, dried-up bottle of India ink, peeled-off block of foreign postage, staple box, or, leaping to another list of leftovers: somebody’s shoes, a favored shirt, the trousers shrouding a pair of last legs, eyeglasses, wristwatch with discolored crystal, Band-Aid, small wooden chest inlaid with chips of yellowed ivory, frat ring formerly on a fat fraternal finger, shears with tarnished blades, billfold bulking in a worn pants pocket, pencil parked behind an unhearing ear, stamp whose corner is curled where it was once licked by a now stilled tongue, that is to say, the inventory of the deceased s possessions as they were when used, gum while chewed, pills as swallowed, whatever would juice out between the letters if a word like fruit' were bitten into, the light dying behind sadly closed lids, the continued push of the belly against the belt, one more breath through a stuffy nose, a bladder full enough it jiggled knees, creating, even at the end, some suspicion about the state of their owner’s nerves; each word which names some quality or state or thing or thought or feeling, oh yes, remaining indelible in its ink, for instance, ‘stain of tea,’ while shifting location from soiled tie to spotted table, type to type, becoming coffee or cola, whatever spilled from the last gasp or out of the glass in a loosened grip, moving its meaning the way a wire walker adjusts his weight in order to keep his posture straight (for when Rilke writes of being outcast on the mountains of the heart, he writes alike of my heart, your alp, my peaks, your grief), since it could be that a different victim felt at the last a dry mouth and a cleaving tongue, had in his gaze a far-off figure which was troubling the attention, possibly a bird dot, leaf wave, gray haze, or perhaps he heard a car door slam or the radiator rumble, maybe these were the bits found on him like wax in his ear, lint in a pocket, all that was left of a worn-out self—Governali, now at Yale, the operatic element, Culp the callow, the caustic, the crude, Planmantee leaning on reason like a cane—because for the coroner or the judge at probate these are just last lists, properties to be divvied up so they may in turn be found on the inventory of a distant beneficiary, itemized again as ' one German mark, faintly fingered,’’just as the historian at his studious browse would read it, “one German mark, faintly fingered, but not as a symbol of the vanity of commerce, no, not to someone dim and humorless as the scholar would surely be, nor as a clue suggesting a trip abroad perhaps, inconceivable, nor the sign of an uncle from the old country come to visit, carrying a souvenir, and certainly never as the talisman of a time when one was young and eager and unsubtle, unaware of the difference between poetry and history, or of the essential responsibility
              one has in this life: to fumble for keys in such a way you find the resemblance in them of any fumble—a bra’s hooks, for instance, football or familiar name— to keep that tea tantalizing the tongue with bittergreen, whether or not it’s the last taste, until it can be compared to more than one concluding phase of a love affair or stage of life or novel’s end; to straighten a paper clip’s racecourse curves into one barely bent but now anxious wire while talking on the phone, as if you were straightening out a marriage; to gaze, to giggle, to say “hey” or “argh," then fall back to sleep again or die, and thereby include wonder, laughter, grunt in your farewell, before fate or your father turns off the light, Proust’s mother says goodnight
              my father marched through the house before he went to work, turning off lights as they were left burning in bath or bedroom, kitchen or closet, counting One in a loud voice as he did so, Two with decisiveness, Three for “1 knew it!” Four in false surprise, Five announced with indignation, Six for a record, Six lights left on! doesn’t anyone ever consider the cost, the waste this represents? no answer from us of course, mum as mum, is everybody here so inconsiderate of others, so careless, so prodigal and la-dee-dah? why, when you're not using it, should a light be on? why, when you have left behind you an empty room, does it need to be lit like a depot? is the furniture frightened of the dark? do we own a bunch of birdies who want to sing? are you banishing boogies? is it so difficult a thing to accomplish, this little string to pull, that button to push? is it so hard to remember? are you all always in such a hurry? so you haven’t a single second to spare to do click, to switch off a switch, all of them easy enough to turn on, it appears: in the bathroom the top light as well as the one above the mirror, every morning, sure as sunshine, and in the bedroom the bedlight, top globe and closet to boot, in the kitchen the fluorescent over the sink, every morning like clockwork, the overhead every morning, too, the breakfast nook inevitably, and who needs the oven’s bitty bulb going, that greasy dim glow? each, my god, left burning . . .
              'burning . , do you understand the word? filling the house with the electric's unhealthy heat.
         because the dark which appears when consciousness clicks off returns all mind to matter, the world sits as if shrouded for the summer, good as dead itself, awaiting the light fall of its dust; since things do wait for us, the paper to be read or written on, the Kleenex to be snotted, the bones of our body to be moved, the sounds in the house attended to, like the squeak of my swivel as I turn to meet Martha big as a bureau in the doorway, not a knock, and bearing in her arms, cradled as though she were carrying a large log or the body of a slain warrior, a dresser drawer 1 can even from my chair see the soil seeping from in slight puffs as she shifts from foot to foot pushing her way in among
        the stacks of magazines and books, her face, 1 would say, wearing the stiff stale look of an old roll, huffing some as she bumps one bunch of books over, tons of testimonies by Holocaust survivors—more witnesses than most murders— they go sprawl, these books setting off smaller slides, but Martha, big and billowy, bears the drawer's dirt toward me, no good no good no good will come of this, I think, more than a bit transfixed by what I have been so long fearing, often rehearsing, postponing like the end of the world, yet finally now nearing its fatal realization, yes, quite a lot of books go down alongside her as she comes on, swinging her load from hither to yon out of weariness, and show'ing no consideration for the narrowness of the path to my desk, a path which is closing behind her the way a wake's water glues itself back together, so I wonder how she'll ever be able to return, and 1 can see how the bottom of the drawer is bowed almost to breaking by its weight, and how its beveled boards have parted so that soil has begun to sift out, especially now that it's being shaken—some of it has beclouded Martha’s skirt, which is anyhow khaki and won t mind—
            Now, during this very disquieting moment, isn’t it strange'3 1 remembered a daisy chain of dreams which occupied my night, and may have been the cause of my unease when, touched by rosy-fingered dawn, 1 woke with the clammy skin of an iced drink to see weary stale walls around me, and a window frosting all outside. In my dream 1 was generally naked, though oddly I wore a watch, glasses hung about my neck on a dirty string, and wasn’t there, about my middle, a sort of warped belt? My worry was when and where I would hold class. 1 was late and lost. Doors opened onto city streets, stairs rose into the limbs of trees. I had neglected the class before, hence a degree of accumulated guilt was already being carried from place to fruitless place. I would find myself on the limb of a balcony, or in an alley of offices, and once in my search I came upon a man who was dancing, one arm holding out a limp wrist, the other creating, above the dot of his head, the shape of a question mark. His familiar form revolved very' slowly, beginning to tip like a dying top. Alongside his sagg>ng pirouette, another man was stretched out in a barber chair, sheeted like the dead except for hunks of silver hair which escaped his concealment. 1 hese two were observed by a final figure in a brown suit and boater hat I felt I also knew, his back to me like the door he in a trice became and into which I went to have breakfast in a basement which contained rows of trestle tables bearing steel trays laden with blueberry buns, nested cups, and stainless urns ol coffee, the tabletops papered with church announcements and images of the Virgin, as well as one depicting the youthful Jesus admonishing his teachers in tones of sepia and Mercurochrome. When 1 picked up a roll it was suddenly wrapped, and 1 plucked futilely at the paper trying to get its pieces to
             part. A cup caught drops of coffee coming from an urn, but there was not enough to think of drinking. I walked through a wall or in some way arrived in the street again where I encountered the dancer in a cab. Through his window 1 shouted I admired his steps. “You should at least cover your dork,” he said. “Your dork is not desirable.” I was trying to get some clothes on, beginning, 1 guess, with shoes. Bent over in a posture 1 can no longer assume while awake, 1 was twining my hair around my toes, tangling my fingers too, lacing up nothing, naked as ever, terribly anxious, terribly exposed. Then onto my face flowed the wall of my cold room, washed in a pale light made from crusted snow.
             Not that 1 remembered all this while Martha wobbled her way toward me. Of course not. 1 remembered then that I had had this bad bad dream, and now—how awful could awful be?—would have, was having—worse than worse—another. I was about to be confronted by one of my “Mothers of America and the World.
                                         The Drunkard’s Song
                                                                                                            What a way to weave loss of balance
                                        loss of self-respect
                                              absence of order all control gorge going upward like loathing and revulsion stopping at every floor what a way to whore retention of water thinning of blood
                                                            doubling of vision the four comers of the eyes alive with lizards alive with vines trembling in lost limbs thickening speech pale puffy cheeks worm fat words softening the teeth
                        souring the breath
                             enlarging the liver
                            every organ idle
                                 though double pumped in every church
                                       beneath every gown
                                            playing god save the green brown
                                                bottom of the bottle tip it drip it slow what a way to go mothering is such despair who could continue to stand up in it sucking on tyranny’s tit wetting the lip focusing the eye on a blur called glory what a way to wobble because mothering
                 is being let down slowly is watching sons grow surly
                                 sacrifice and labor
                                       earn absence and disfavor lack of care loss of love
                                                      decay of pride surceaseless isolation with one wish fond and final not to have given birth not to have sponsored life not to have parted one thigh from another
                       not to have been some bastard’s mother to die in delivery
                                 to die in the nursery
                                       to die of one’s monthly
                                                to die in advance
                                                    of fumbling and exposure not to be shit’s water or receive lies like threatening letters learn illusions like painful lessons suffer shameful disclosures abuse and refusal though queen of the kitchen princess of the parlor maid of all work
                                 and grateful to
                                      get a card of greeting buss of betrothal
                                                fuck of convenience yes, maid of misery’s memory princess of your prick queen of the crotch it’s, yes, yours truly and the signature shaken
                                                    shuddered from the pen so someone as you sway
                                           to no one’s music
                                                as you dance disgust and celebrate your degradation can say, hey, kiddo what a way to weave.
              —and that—that?—that was where my attention was—on the revision of a youthful poem by a bad dream—when Martha rather rudely brushed by me and with a heartfelt hooof tipped the entire drawer over my manuscript, forming not exactly a hill, rather more a mound of earth, on top of my table. The dirt's very dry by this time so there's a lot of dust, although clods of clay, in their original hacked-out chunks, trowel marks sometimes still visible, tumbled from the heap onto other books and papers. The sound of my hard-won soil sliding between these many sheets of paper was like a seethe of fall leaves. There were runnels of late earth everywhere, settling into cracks and mars, darkening the desk like a coal miner's face.
          Martha has the drawer pinned under her left arm now. “I want all of mv dressers emptied and scrubbed," she says in a chillingly calm and even tone. 1 dumbly nod. “In a day or two I’ll be moving the furniture into my shop." 1 search for some significance in the muscles of her face, and find none Her face is pale, very pale, powdery, very powdery, it looks tight and dry, but her expression is as relaxed as her voice, and as noncommittal. 1 am near panic myself, though my heart begins to slow somewhat when I realize that Martha can't have found the remains of her cat.
          Many of the drawer bottoms will have broken, 1 am willing to bet, but keep my own counsel, my face, as if sunburned, facing her face. 1 might have been caught with my hand on my cock, my shame could be no more searing. Martha turns her back, kicks certain books and papers from her path with a flick of her foot. “So this is why you were digging holes in the basement floor,” she says in a voice as flat as a sanded board. “1 suggest you pack it all back. And sweep the signs of it. Cover your tracks. An entire stack of American Legion magazines falls in disarray. Martha’s chaos is confounding mine. She has a rump wide enough to occupy two chairs and puts it in the doorway like a door. “I never realized how much you hated my breakfronts, my dressers and chests,” she says to the outer harbor of the hall. “To dig to do this.” A bunch of blond curls wags in wonderment and she waddles away. Almost. She is but a shade. “Clean. Clean to the last crumb. 1 don’t want your dirt in my drawers any more than 1 want your ideas in my head,” I hear her say.
                       Listen to the spaces between the words.
                       Concentrate on them for a change.
                       Note the rests between the turds,
                       And over such movements let the mind range.
                       Observe how picturesque, how colorful, how French their rich compresent company is: the calm of mountains or the former perch of birds, the peace of my buried pages, me beneath me, the way the murdered were married in their trench.
          Is that all? Surely there will be more. Surely she will swear my soul sore. With my wife gone, gone down it, gone out of sight down it, the hall becomes a tunnel made of morning mist. Down which her bottom disappears like a dredge. Martha has determined that not even hate shall hold us in common arms. As 1 suppose death, this denouement is disappointing. My life’s work lies beneath a heap of yellow, gray, and bluish dirt, under what a hole held, the center of zip. Nothing is enough. I’m inclined to say so what. I’ll feel about it later.
       Now I'll say so what. Or argh. 1 had nearly run out of pages among which to conceal my mind, and now that realm itself, hidden as it had been in History, is buried beneath this dunglike slag. What will happen next? Should I close down consciousness and sell the store? Will I know happiness, feel relief, and, if not at this moment, will I enjoy it later? who will come to take Culp’s place and defend me from fear with a couplet? Feet of clay, you might say, all my heroes had—Herschel, Plan, Tomasso, Magus Tabor—but awfully large ones anyway, when they’ve crumbled to cover such a mass of intermeshing rages. Martha thinks I mined my mine only to dirty her drawers, took no more dig away than that, was never going down or out or on or forward, and maybe she is right. Though she said ‘holes." She doesn’t know everything. Actually she hasn’t a clue. At least she got the joke. Did she? Since she hates puns so, as if they were the barbarians at the gates. Perhaps she came in here, read a few pages; but that’s unlikely; she’s such a wide load she’d have left a trail. 1 know she won’t hang around, won’t watch while I find a place to put my leavings; she won’t care to oversee the cleaning, although her absence won’t be an exercise of tact. Martha doesn’t want to touch me now, even with her eyes. Perhaps I’ll throw the earth 1 take from the interior of her furniture onto her bed in a tall pile. As though all the fun 1 hadn’t had there, over our many years of side-byside separation, had returned to haunt her. Martha, darling, I could say, with a vicious smile borrowed from the stage, see this fistful? this stands for all the times you wouldn’t let me whisper dirty doings in your ear. And this for wearing flannel. And this for scissoring your hair. This is the ash of desires denied, the shit from all the fat chances not toothfully taken. And then I would put my dirty hand in hers, ha ha, and lead her to the window, ha, where we would put our gazes on together, ha, ha, ha, and 1 would Shakespeareanly say: Beneath that barest crust of snow, which conceals the meadow from us, lies all that life which, fearful for it, waits to be born. Yes, thus I would grandly begin, but she would interrupt me with a snort from her derision because she despises oratory, wants to slap cheeks when they puff. What has it been doing down there, unstirring in the stiff earth, making not a sound, saying not a word against God or any other cause of grief? does it deserve the burden of birth? because barely are the fresh shoots up than they are eaten: rabbits and squirrels and deer and mice and the last late frost nip the best bits; barely are the eyes burned by the sterile walls than the wants begin, and the wailing, and the wish to hang on to everything, to every lung of air, every mouthful of milky nipple, sure; and it’s painful to push up through the hard earth and the cold snow into a short day only to have your blooms blasted, and your roots ripped; so what is a word worth if it is never heard? if it has been pointlessly composed, and one has lived only to feed another’s life, serve another’s interests, be led by pleasure to pre-
       serve some paltry species, and born stupid, die dumb" why grow painfully past puberty in order to be imprisoned, married in order to be made a eunuch, and
       to have lived—which is the same as suffered, doesn’t the Buddha say"___so that
       such a weary round be replicated^ not one of the seeds in that snoring sod, dear Martha, deserves the penalties the greengrocer has in store for it; then only suppose that instead of bringing forth flowers the bulb retreated to some former time just before it burgeoned, that pollen blew back into the breeze which bore it toward its pistil; suppose the tables were turned on death, it was bullied to begin things, and bear its children backward, so that the first breath didn’t swell the lung but stepped on it instead, as with a heavy foot upon a pedal; that there was, by god, a rebellion in the ranks, and life picked the past
       to be in rather than another round of empty clicks called present time_in the
       contrivance of the couplet, and with the connivance of rhyme. I made____
       Marty—I made a try. I abandoned Poetry for History in my Youth.
         What a journey, though, to crawl in earth first, then in filth swim; to pass through your own plumbing, meet the worms within. And realize it. That you were. Under all the world. When I was a kid 1 lied like a sewer system. I told my sometime chums I went there. To the realm of shades. And said I saw vast halls, the many chambers of endless caves, magic pools guarded by Merlins dressed in mole fur and cobweb, chests overflowing with doubtless dime-store jewelry, rooms of doubloons, and, suddenly, through an opening jagged as a rip in rotten cloth, a new sun shining, meadows filled with healthy flowers, crayon-colored streams, oh, the acres of Edens inside ourselves, I said 1 saw, as if I hoped for it, wanted to believe. Am 1 not at least that far redeemed" to have caught up to the first half-truth in my fantasy eventually? Come back from below ground, if not from the underworld, to say . . .
         Argh. Nothing much. It is another day.
            Ah, well, the work. 1 feel it in my knees and fingers. All of me as if worn, bottom sore, belly big, its bowl bruised, my hands unclean, nails dark below the nub. What a damnable dig it’s been. Even my nightmares grow holes. Among my rumpled sheets there must be one I've written something straightaway on. Sincere, as they say, as a knife. Memories brought back from the ground where they’d been clayed; memories rehid, newburied, in her heavy Victorian ar-moires and dressers. Did justice get done? Yet? Dump it all, say, on the parlor rug: a little lump of language. If we had a dog it could be blamed. Who can say? No one had mouth enough to please me. And I so easily brought off. In my hkelife life. Sure, it was Susu who was my soul’s sort. She was success in the pure form of failure I’ve got to get a move on. Many a pile to unmake before we part. And the cat as if stuffed by death. Never mind, morning will frighten its furs like a wind and make it seem alive. Lou, you lived like a flute, loved me
             like a trill from it. That sweet. That short. Tin thin. Susu a fart. I too. Whew. As if my buttocks did my breathing. Yes, she was my soul’s sort, she sang so. Tabor like a tambourine. I’ve got to decide. Clean up. Get on? Make my wrong right. Take one day like a pill to prevent the illness of another. What do they call it? Takes a signature. Resignation. With decency subside. Write no more propaganda for the PdP. Achieve dignity. Sport a swatch of Shawwhite beard bleached to remove cig stains, and trimmed square to greet the face of its maker. In short, to abide. In the last hamlet of feeling. I'm inclined to say why not? Sure. Or dump every dirty drawer onto my desk—wasn’t that really Martha’s suggestion?—till the desk’s hid, as well as Tabor’s turning chair and the floor which firmed our feet, covering the pages of my History as my History sheeted me; there to let my words wait, like the disappointed people bide, before they try life again. Meanwhile carry on without complaining. No arm with armband raised on high. No more booming bands, no searchlit skies. Or shall I, like the rivers, rise? Ah. Well. Is rising wise? Revolver like the Fiihrer near an ear. Or lay my mind down by sorrow's side.